 MARKUS KLUTE: Welcome back to 8.20, special relativity.  In the previous section, we have seen  how we can look at energy and momentum of particles  in a decay.  Here we now want to, in collisions of particles,  create new particles.  The example, the first example here,  is the collision of two protons to create a proton, a neutron,  and a charged pion.  The masses are given there.  So the question now is, what is the minimal energy  needed in order for this process to occur  in a fixed-target experiment?  Fixed-target experiment is we have an accelerated proton  and another proton at rest.  This might just be a hydrogen target just sitting there.  So the question is, how much energy--  how much do we have to accelerate  the proton for this process to be possible?  Now, again, stop the video, and try to work this out.  The important part here is to realize  that minimal energy here means that, after the decay  or the decay after the process occurred,  all the new particles need to be addressed.  That is when the process requires minimal energy.  So, instead of analyzing this in the laboratory frame,  we want to analyze this in the center-of-mass frame.  All right, the momentum has to be  conserved in this discussion.  So there needs to be some sort of momentum.  But, in the center-of-mass frame, that's not required.  So, in that frame, the momentum of all outgoing particles  can be 0.  And that's how we start the discussion here.  So, in this S prime frame--  here S prime is the center-of-mass frame--  the energy, the minimal energy required, is 2 times  the mass of the proton times gamma.  So here, two protons are colliding  with the same velocity.  And that's then equal to the energy  after this process, c squared times the sum of the masses,  the sum of the mass of the proton, the neutron,  and the charged pion.  And then you just have to solve this for gamma  to find gamma equal to 1.08 or beta in this frame of 0.37.  Note, this is the gamma, relativistic gamma,  or the velocity beta of the protons, two protons  in the center-of-mass frame.  So we're not quite there yet with our answer.  The answer then needs to be boosted back  into the laboratory frame.  And we have seen how we can do this for beta or velocities  in general.  We find beta in the laboratory frame is 2 times--  or just result, 0.37, over 1 plus 0.37  squared, which is 0.65.  That velocity, we can then take and calculate  the gamma factor of the proton in the fixed-target experiment.  All right, so we analyzed this situation  in the center-of-mass frame and then  did a Lorentz transformation by just looking at the velocity  into the fixed-target frame.  So this means now, numerically, that the proton colliding  with the proton at rest has a total energy of this one  proton of gamma m0 c squared, which is 0.32 times 938 MeV  over c--  MeV.  And so that results in 1.238 GeV.  But we're interested in the kinetic energy.  So the kinetic energy here is given  by gamma minus 1 m0 c squared, which is 300 MeV.  So we have to accelerate a proton to 300 MeV  in order to be able to have this process to occur.  All right, very similar problem now, but here  we want to produce anti-matter.  So we have a process of proton plus proton into three protons  and an antiproton.  Charge is conserved.  In the initial state, the charge was 2.  In the final stage, the charge was plus 2 as well.  OK, this works very similar as in the previous problem.  But what we want to do here is compare the fixed target  with symmetric collisions.  OK, so, again, the question is, what is the minimal energy  needed in order to produce antiprotons  in proton-proton collisions?  OK, so, exactly following the same procedure as before,  in the center-of-mass energy, the energy is 2 times  the mass of the protons times gamma times c squared.  And that's 4 times the mass of the proton.  OK, gamma prime, so the gamma factor  in the center-of-mass frame is 2.  Beta is 0.75.  And then we just do the very same thing again.  We calculate the velocity in the fixed-target frame.  And we find the velocity of beta of 0.96 and gamma of 3.57.  So, if we compare this now, we need a pair of 1 GeV--  remember, gamma minus 1 is the kinetic energy--  protons in a collider experiment or 2.57 GeV  protons in a fixed-target experiment.  OK, so you see that, in fixed-target experiment,  in order to produce new particles,  the energy has to be much larger, a factor of 2.5  here in this example, than a colliding experiment.  And that explains why we use collider experiments in order  to test the energy frontier, in order to produce the largest  possible energies.  And the LHC is one example where we  have proton-proton collisions in a circular ring where  those protons are brought together  in symmetrical collisions. 