 The following content is provided under a Creative  Commons license.  Your support will help MIT OpenCourseWare  continue to offer high quality educational resources for free.  To make a donation or view additional materials  from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT OpenCourseWare  at ocw.mit.edu.  PROFESSOR: We continue this wee, next week,  with our conversation-- it's really our final conversation--  about the genre forms that are at the center of the Hollywood  era with a consideration of the Western.  And that perhaps we should begin by acknowledging  how central the Western is as a movie  form in the history of American cinema.  Before the advent of television in the late '40s--  the first American television broadcast was 1946.  And we can say the television is actually  established is a social experience in American life  certainly by the late '40s, by let's say 1949 or 1950.  And it's through the '50s that television  spreads through the society and begins to supplant the movies.  So that before television, let's say  that before 1950, nearly 30% percent  of every movie made in the United States  was a Western all the way through the Hollywood era.  And in fact, in the silent era, as I will describe briefly  again this evening when I do a kind of mini history  of the Western movie, even in the silent era,  it's a central form.  And even after the 1950s, even after the advent of television,  nearly half of all movies that we  might identify as set in the past, as historical movies,  were Westerns.  And of course, as I suggested when  I talked about the musical, the Western  can be understood along with the musical as a uniquely American  form, even though at a certain point  in the mid and late '1960s, certain gifted Italian  directors begin to take over the Western  and darken it and throw a kind of European cynicism  into the tradition of the Western.  By that time, the Western genre evolved and transformed  in ways that made this cynicism not completely unique, not  totally European, because a kind of subversive perspective  had begun to enter the American version of the Western as well.  Nonetheless, the Western form underwent  profound transformations.  And it's those transformations that I  want to briefly to talk about here in an introductory way.  And I'll return to that sort of what  we might call the trajectory or the career  of the Western briefly this evening when I introduce  some comments I want to make about John Ford  and about his classic Western, the film we're watching  tonight, "The Searchers."  I want to talk a little bit more,  not only about the Western, but about why the Western might  be seen as being the central American form,  why it is so central not only to the History of American cinema,  but in a certain sense, central to the cultural history  of American society.  One way to see this is to reframe  the idea I've been suggesting all through the term  this notion that at a certain point,  the movies became a form of central storytelling  in the society, the form of storytelling  that more Americans than any other form  participated in and experienced, a form that I've  come to label consensus narrative,  a kind of story system that appeals across social barriers  and across age that intends in some sense to express what  might be called the dominant or the central values  of a society.  We talked about this idea-- I've talked about this idea  already at some length and I don't  want to spend too much time on it here.  But I want to complicate those ideas one more  time by reminding you that one way to think about or one way  to frame this notion that the movies and the Western form  in particular embody this notion of a story form that  tends to reach the whole society or to speak  for the whole society or to embody  the central values of the whole society  is one way of understanding the implications of that  is to recognize, first of all, that the Hollywood system which  is so committed to forms of genre representation  is particularly served by the principles of repetition that  are inherent in the conventions that surround the Western.  Even the Western-- the content of Westerns  or the attitudes within Westerns might  undergo great transformations, the basic formulas  remain recognizable from the earliest days.  We think about the costumes, the horses, the guns, and so forth,  and even certain basic plots and subplots that  keep returning in the Western.  As with the musical, the genre is so robust  that it has many sort of some sub  within it so that one can talk about Westerns  that involve battles between sheep herders and ranchers.  Or one can talk about the Westerns  that are so focused on the laying  of the transcontinental railroad.  Or one could focus on Westerns that focus  on the conflict between white settlers and Indians.  Now, many Westerns combine a number of these elements.  And there are other sub genres we could describe.  The very fact that there are these sub genres  is a measure of how robust the system became.  And one way to think, therefore, about this idea that I've  labeled, consensus narrative, or another way  to think about what I've earlier in the course  called the cultural work of the movies  or the cultural, the anthropological job,  that genre forms in general during the Hollywood era  perform, is to recognize that we can understand  the specific genre as a distilled  instance of the larger process of the movies,  right, as a smaller clarifying instance,  we can understand in a certain sense  as a forum, a space of conversation,  a space of discourse in which the culture engages  in a kind of ongoing conversation.  You remember the terms I used earlier borrowing  from the English critic Raymond Williams.  I said that we can understand that these genre reforms  or these consensus forms could be said to mobilize  three different strains of attitude--  an emergent, a dominant, and a traditional set of voices--  and that one of the explanations for why  genre texts and the Hollywood movie specifically  and the Western in particular are often so conflicted  or divided is precisely that they embody  or incorporate some attitudes that  are traditional and old fashioned, some attitudes that  are emerging and challenge traditional ideas,  and also what we might central or dominant values,  and that not every text will balance those elements  in exactly the same way.  The second point about this is to recognize  that one of the beauties of genre, one of the reasons  they serve such a fundamental cultural or anthropological  function in a society, is precisely  that they go on forever, that in other words  we can think of genre forms as a kind of ongoing continuing  conversation centered on the same formats  and the same conventions.  And if the genre is stable and if the society produces  these genre forms over decades, the genre  form itself becomes a mirror in which we can see  reflected the changing values and assumptions of the culture.  Now, this might be true of any kind of a particular genre  form in any medium.  But the reason it has special force when  we're talking about the movies in the 20th century  in the United States is precisely  because the form is so central to the society,  because so much of the society participates in it.  So the picture of the society that  is the ambivalent and conflicted picture of the society that  emerges from studying these genre forms  is likely to be far more illuminating about the larger  culture than, let's say, a study of a cultural form, let's say,  like opera.  Not that the opera isn't worth studying and doesn't reflect  certain cultural values too, but because the opera appeals  to a particular subculture, the values  are going to be narrower.  The kinds of assumptions the people writing opera  and attending opera make about the larger culture and about  aesthetic experience are profoundly  different from the much more dispersed  and democratic attitudes and accessible notions  that animate the create of a consensus form,  of a form that's trying to reach the whole of a culture.  So this is a way of reminding you  of what we might call the sociological and  anthropological importance of the study of popular forms  in general and of American movies  in particular, the Western genre even more especially.  We can think, therefore, of the Western almost  as a form of kind of national theater, a kind of repertory  company in which the same relatively small number,  recognizably small number, of actors and actresses,  of directors and other sub specialists whose names are  never remembered, collaborate to create the film.  We can think of the movies as embodying,  in a certain sense, what I'm calling  the theater of a nation.  And I put the phrase in quotation marks  not because it's a fancy phrase, but because I  want to call attention to the fact  that I'm actually borrowing a phrase  from a great literary historian who  wrote a book about Shakespeare's audience  and about Shakespeare's plays and about the public theater  of Shakespeare's day and called that theater the theater  of a nation.  And in a certain sense, we could say that the Hollywood system  was a similar kind of theater.  It doesn't from this that every text created  there is a noble work of art.  And it's very important to recognize  that the distinction I'm making between  and anthropological perspective and an artistic one  must hold here.  And it's another reason for emphasizing this.  Because the fact of the matter is  it's very hard in a course like this,  especially-- because some of these films are so wonderful,  my own enthusiasm encourages you to like them  and I want you to like them.  Nonetheless, it's very important to recognize  that I'm not trying to tell you a merely triumphalist story  about how magnificently American movies began  to sort of realize their possibilities  and dramatize experience.  Because in a certain fundamental sense,  these consensus values are not necessarily noble ones.  And the western is a particularly clear instance  of this.  And what I'm talking about in a certain sense  is the extent to which these genre reforms carry  the lies, the prejudices, the nasty qualities of a society  as well as their ideals and values.  And we can feel those elements, even though the films  themselves want to tell uplifting stories,  the values embedded in them may not be so attractive at all.  And the Western is a particularly clear instance  of this-- a reminder, again, that we don't just  look at films for aesthetic satisfaction.  We don't just look at films for-- we  don't need to just look at films for mere enjoyment.  They are anthropological artifacts  of the greatest importance exactly because they existed  at such a central, at such a fundamental space in the larger  society.  Why would the Western-- why would the Western  be such a central form?  Why, in some sense, could we think of the movies,  with its vast, wide, giant screen,  as the ultimate destiny of the Western?  I think one explanation for the power of the Western film,  because there were Western stories  and other Western formats before the advent of film--  and I'll talk about them in a moment.  Why would the film be such a decisive space for the Western?  And I think if you think about it for a moment,  you'll recognize instantly why that is the case.  The format of the movies is particularly  conducive to the sense of grandeur and largeness,  spaciousness, that's characteristic of Western  spaces and of the parables of heroism and social create,  society creation, so the equation  of a particular culture or environment in the wilderness,  the establishment of civilization as a recurring  theme in the western.  This kind of recurring subject is  at the very heart of what Westerns do and turn  the movies, I think, into a particularly appropriate  environment for the largeness and grandeur  that Westerns represent.  But that itself isn't quite enough to explain  why the Westerns occupy such a central place.  And of course, there are historical and cultural  explanations as well.  The first explanation is that the movies  are born at the end of a period in which we could say  the real west actually existed.  In other words, the movies come in just  at the moment-- the movies actually are still  around when the experience of what we call the West  was still historically actual.  It wasn't quite in the past.  The Western genre is focused really  on a 30 year period, that what some critics have  called the real west, in the period from about 1860  through 1890.  And this is the period of the Civil War, of a whole variety  of Indian wars, of the laying of the transcontinental railroad,  of the California and Dakota gold rushes,  the period of the range wars I mentioned a little while ago  between settlers and great ranchers who  wanted to keep spaces open for their cattle.  And of course, we now realize it's the period,  although the early Westerns didn't want to acknowledge this  and told a kind of opposite, it's  also of course the era in which we exterminate,  virtually-- the era of genocide against Native Americans,  the extermination of Indians and of the Buffalo that  roamed the Western plains.  And before this real west moment was over,  even before it became history, it  had begun to be mythologized.  It was mythologized in the popular culture  simultaneously with its actual existence.  And there were a whole series of forms of publication  and forms of drama that drew on the west and stories  of the west and begin to establish what we might call  the basic conventions of the Western mythology  or the parable America likes to tell itself  about the nature of the settling the West.  One of these forms were the dime novels  that appeared in the late 19th century  and into the early 20th century, available usually in paperback  at news stands.  And some of them were immensely popular.  Here's one title, a very famous one,  the equivalent of a best seller, I guess,  of the day published in 1882-- The Life, Times,  and Treacherous Death of Jesse James, 1882.  And of course, what these dime novels  did was they took what were quasi historical events,  sometimes real events, and immensely elaborated them,  fictionized them into heroic fables of various kinds,  often celebrating people like Jesse James who  may well have been outlaws and disreputable people  in actuality.  Another title-- The Illustrated Lives and Adventures  of Frank and Jesse James and the Younger Brothers.  And you can imagine what that kind of thing would have done.  In addition to these dime novels,  there will also stage performances, plays.  They were often some form of melodrama set in the Old West  and involving the basic costumes and accoutrements of a Western,  right?  Pistols and cowboy hats and school marms from the east  and so forth.  But perhaps even more important than these two sources,  and they were very powerful and important forms  of popular culture before films to help establish what we might  call the mythology of the west, were the Buffalo Bill shows,  the wild west shows.  These were unbelievably popular and successful.  Here is a picture of a kind of flyer  that would be distributed in small towns  or sometimes in larger towns as the Wild West show  and-- the Wild West show came to town.  The star of the Wild West show was William Cody, Buffalo Bill.  He had a very modest actual career in the west.  But it was immensely elaborated by him and his publicist  into something much grander and more remarkable.  Buffalo Bill made his first age appearance in 1872  in a stage melodrama called "Scout of the Planes,"  which went on a two year four, right?  And then in 1882, 10 years later,  he formed his own wild west show, which  became immensely popular, traveled all over the country,  and then made trips to Europe.  He even did one Wild West show before the Queen of England.  And it was an immensely successful public enactment.  The basic elements of the wild west show  contained the essential mythology that  then moved into the movies.  They often dramatized-- in the wild west show,  they often dramatize a battle between white men  and Indians in which the Indians were very treacherous  and were finally defeated.  They sometimes, in fact, in some of the forms of the wild west  show, they reenacted the Battle of Little Bighorn  in which at the last minute, there was a rescue.  They reversed history in it sometimes  in order to dramatize an outcome that  was more appealing to the white audiences.  The wild west show staged battles  between cowboys and Indians.  And in fact, one of the great historical ironies,  the historical irony that the director we're  looking at next week, Robert Altman,  actually picks up on in one of his films called  "Buffalo Bill and the Indians," a film he made in the 1970s--  1975, I think.  One of the shocking things is that at a certain point,  at least for two years, I think, one  of the participants in the Wild West shows  was Sitting Bull himself, the defeated Indian,  the defeated Native American leader who was now domesticated  and actually became part of the show.  And in Altman's fictionalized version of this episode,  a drunken Paul Newman plays Buffalo Bill.  And he's mocked and made fun of in some sense  by a character who represents Chief Sitting Bull, who  has all the dignity-- he's almost the only character  in the film with real dignity.  It's a subversive post Hollywood era Western,  as you might guess.  So the Wild West shows, the Buffalo Bill wild west shows,  were essentially an early rehearsal  for what the movies became.  And many of the elements of the wild west  show-- fancy roping, fancy shooting,  conflicts between cowboys and Indians, the performance  of various horse riding tricks, herding of cattle  and so forth-- all sort of contained the elements that  then moved into the movies in an even more  systematic and powerful way.  And then I might mention one final source--  the novel itself.  At the beginning of the 20th century,  in 1902, one of the best selling novels of all time in English  was published.  It was a book called The Virginian  by a writer named Owen Worcester.  And it remains one of the bestselling  books in the history of the United States.  It still sells thousands of books every year.  I once found, in a used bookstore,  an addition of The Virginian that  had been published I think 15 years  after its original publication.  And that addition was, I think, the 50th addition of the book.  It went through an incredible number of-- and in fact,  the addition I had also included beautiful illustrations that  obviously were added to later additions  once the popularity of the book became known.  So what we find is that the popular culture  before the advent of movies had already, in some sense,  created a full fledged mythology of the Western,  had familiarized the society with the basic attitudes,  assumptions, costumes, and fundamental archetypal  characters who organize the Western.  And there's one further thing to emphasize.  This may be the most important thing  of all, what we might call the intellectual culture.  It was-- not only was there a real historical background  to the Western and not only was there  a profound form of popular culture in theater,  in public performances, like these wild west shows,  and in dime novels as well as in literary novels--  a tremendous compost of discourse  that already sort of establishes the genre even  before the movies arrive.  There was also a final touch.  And this is the thing that helps to explain, I think,  maybe more powerfully than the other examples I've given you  why the Western had such a hold and continues in some ways  to have such a vestigial hold on the American imagination  and on America's sense of itself.  And that is what happens in what I call here  the intellectual culture.  In 1893, one of the most famous historians, Frederick Jackson  Turner, published an essay in the American Historical Soci--  or delivered a lecture and then it was later  published as an essay-- delivered  a lecture to the American Historical Society.  And the title of the essay was "The Significance  of the Frontier in American History."  it's probably the single most influential historical essay  about the American past.  It's been attacked and undermined and qualified  and its limitations have been widely discussed  over the last 25 years.  But it still remains, in some respects, a seminal essay,  even when historians are reacting against it-- one  of the most important central essays about the nature  of American culture.  And this article-- in this article, Frederick Jackson  Turner argued essentially that-- he  was trying to make a case for what  makes the United States unique.  He was making a case for what we now  call American exceptionalism, a dubious proposition.  But let's listen to his argument,  which has a good deal of power and interest.  He said essentially that the existence  of free land, of a continuously receding settlement,  of a continuously receding frontier, the advance  of settlement westward with European settlers  always pressing against that frontier,  that the existence of such a reality in American life  had altered inherited notions of social class and aristocratic  government and had created a tendency toward what Turner  implied were or said were the American ideals  of individualism and classlessness,  of democracy itself.  In other words, the United States,  according to Turner's argument, had  a particularly open and democratic feel  because the existence of this frontier allowed people  to escape into a new life, to find possibilities,  to escape the confinements of social class,  even perhaps in some small degree of gender,  although feminist historians have certainly  shown how confining the life of women in the west actually was.  Nonetheless, a sense that the existence of the frontier  made the United States a uniquely individualistic  and a uniquely free society.  What Turner had done, of course, was  define a central historical myth for European Americans,  for the white society in the United States.  And we've come to recognize that limitations of the argument.  What's the most profound, obvious limitation  that occurs to you instantly?  How about the people who already here, right?  In other words, one of the things  that's wrong with the Turner thesis  is that it's oblivious to the existence  of the Native Americans who were pushed aside  by the white settlers.  It's a very complex story and I don't want to oversimplify it.  I don't mean that the heroic white people who  got in the Conestoga wagons and who  settled the west, about whom there  are dozens if not hundreds if not thousands of-- certainly  thousands if we count stories in all formats-- of movies  and books and short stories and plays and so forth.  I don't want to suggest that there  was nothing heroic or remarkable about that behavior.  There was.  The United States is not wrong-- American culture is not  wrong in some sense to celebrate the heroism of those people.  But of course, as we've come to realize,  and as many of our most recent Westerns openly acknowledge,  this original mythology which sort of celebrated  unambiguously the white settlement of the West  was actually also in some sense an invasion  and even a genocide.  And the Turner thesis doesn't even imagine that.  It sees it as a triumphal reality.  So there were limits, terrible limits, to the argument.  But there's also something profoundly helpful  about the argument.  There is a sense of spaciousness,  a sense of new possibilities, a greater hostility  to social class and inherited wealth in the United States  than there are in other places.  And for both good and ill, the United States  celebrates forms of individualism  as against communal behavior with a kind of intensity  and compelling power that many, many, not just Europeans,  that many, many non Americans think is excessive and think  has been reflected in some sense in various forms  of national behavior which we needn't discuss in detail now.  But you could all imagine your own examples.  But to come back to the primary point,  then, one of the reasons that-- it's as if the movies were sort  of waiting for the Western, as if the Western form already  in some sense, in fundamental ways, fully formed  comes into the movies just as the movies are born,  as if the format of the movies and the content of the Western  were made for each other in some sense.  And it becomes one of the dominant, one of the signature  features of American cinema.  One of the fundamental aspects of what the Western is,  if we think of it as a kind of cultural mythology,  is that it tells a founding story.  It tells the story again and again.  It repeats it every time you see a Western in some sense.  Every Western is implicitly a story  about the foundation of a society,  about the equation of a community.  It's always implicitly about it.  In many Westerns, this is an explicit topic.  And what we can say is that this means  that the Western is the United States' form of a kind of story  that every culture has, right?  The ancient Greeks had a founding mythology  grounded in The Iliad and The Odyssey, right?  And Tudor England had a founding mythology  partly promulgated by Shakespeare in the history  plays that were put on in the public theater  in the 16th century.  And what we can say about these founding  stories as they are always, in some sense, fantasies  or fictions.  But they articulate values and assumptions  that the culture, in some sense, would  like to believe about itself.  And by their reiteration, by their repetition,  by telling them again and again, they  instantiate these values, these assumptions about the society,  in the culture as a whole.  Their very repetition is important.  Because one of the fundamental things  about a myth or a mythology, one of the most fundamental things  about it, is that it's a collective--  it's a collective story.  It's not made by a single person.  And one way to think about all Westerns,  although of course many of the best Westerns  have the trace of-- more than the traces--  have the imprint of individual contributions.  John Ford-- John Ford is a great director.  And there are aspects of John Ford's personality  in every one of his Westerns.  Nonetheless, even the most profoundly Fordian Western  is still a collaborative form, not only  because Ford as a director-- because the movies  are inherently collaborative because they  have so many different people who contribute  to the creation of the whole.  No one, even the most powerful director,  can completely control everything.  The greatest directors know how to collaborate  with their performance and their writers.  But in any case, it's a collaborative form  to begin with, right?  But there's another kind of collaboration,  several other kinds.  What are they?  One of them is that every Western is implicitly  in a conversation with every previous Western.  And in that since, there's no author.  It's a collective-- the story of the American Western,  in that sense, is a collective story.  It's a creation of the culture.  And in fact, every new version of the Western  adds to the mythology in some sense, right?  So in that sense, we can think of genre reforms  generally, the Western in particular,  as a particular kind of ongoing, recurring discourse.  And if you come back again to the arguments I was making  at the beginning of our class about the ways in which  genre forms and especially the Western  can be seen to sort of dramatize cultural change  or the way in which a society's attitudes may alter over time  exactly because so many elements of a genre  are stable and recognizable, those that are different  are easy to recognize, are easy to identify and speculate  about.  So one of the things we're recognizing here  is that in a certain sense, the very fact that the mythology is  open, is unfinished, reflects something that's  fundamental about society too.  And this is part of Raymond Williams' great insight  into culture when he said-- what he  said was culture is a constant mix of emergent, traditional,  and dominant voices.  It's never over.  What culture is is a conversation.  It's never any one fixed thing because culture is always  in process.  It's always changing.  And what we can say-- the value of these genre reforms,  and especially because the movies could reach so widely,  even across linguistic barriers, the value of the movies  or the power of the movies as a form of this kind of discourse  is overwhelmingly clear exactly because we  can imagine this process, this conversation,  going on repeatedly over time-- the recognizable elements  juxtaposed against the elements that are not recognizable,  allowing for a kind of constant process of reevaluation,  of rehearsal, and of rethinking, right?  And we can say, in fact, that that's  one of the deep functions that genre forms in general play  and it's one of the central functions  that the Hollywood movie plays.  And I'll try to concretize this for you  this evening in a kind of-- it's a kind of comic attempt,  but I'm going to give you a kind of capsule history  of the trajectory of the Western from its earliest days,  from "The Great Train Robbery," to "Unforgiven."  So the Western is a mythology.  It's a mythology.  The fact that mythologies themselves are open  ended, are spaces in which a society defines and redefines  its identity and its central values, makes the Western movie  a particularly powerful and central anthropological space.  It enacts, in different ways over and over again,  a story about the founding of society.  And at the end, it is grounded therefore  also in a series of complex dichotomies  that are worth making clear, even though they're  very obvious when you think about what all Westerns do.  But think about them.  One of the dichotomies is the dichotomy  between what is thought to be civilized  and what is thought to be savage-- between civilization  and savagery.  Another is often between East and West  in which the east represents civilization  and the west the sa-- but there's an ambivalence.  Because the east is also a place that  is thought to be dessicated and lacking vitality.  And the west is thought to be an authentic place that  tests us in our heroic, largest possibilities, right?  And another kind of dichotomy that is present  in virtually all Westerns is a dichotomy between what we might  call the claims of community, the claims of society  on the one side, and the claims of the individual  on the other side, right?  This is a special problem for the Western  because it celebrates American individualism so powerfully.  The iconic scenes of the Western in which  two men wearing guns square off against each other  and the quicker one survives-- that scene of the quick draw  one and of the death in the dusty street  could be sent to be a kind of embodiment of these values  in which you have to rely on yourself.  You can't rely on someone else.  You can't rely on the government.  You can't rely on the Sheriff.  You can't rely on the police.  You can't rely on your neighbors.  You have to trust yourself.  And in fact, one of the ways you can  see the power of these Western mythologies operating,  as it seems to me in some sense, one  of the great divides in the United States today  over the question of guns and gun control  is partly grounded in these myths of individualism  that the Western mythology has been  promulgating since before the advent of the movies.  In other words, the attitudes-- and in fact,  if you listen to even some of the most extreme forms of gun  rights advocates actually talk in a language  that we can recognize from Westerns, from Western movies.  Not an accident that one of our recent presidents  was a star in Western films and actually remembered  some films he'd been in as if they'd been actual history.  And I don't say that in a way to sort of disparage  poor Ronald Reagan at all, but as a way of reminding us  the confluence or the confusion of actual history  with these mythological accounts of the west  is a characteristic feature of the American imagination.  How could it be otherwise?  We have been so inundated in these stories about the west.  So another dichotomy, then, is that between society  and the individual, maybe finally we  can say a dichotomy between culture and nature, right?  Which is the story that's enacted again and again  in the great epic stories that every culture sort of generates  for itself.  One of the most distinctive features of these dichotomies  is the divided hero, a character you'll  see embodied with great complexity in tonight's film  played by John Wayne, a character who  is-- the Western hero is often seen very ambivalently  as both a savior and a savage, as someone who has the power  and authority to bring a kind of decency and lawfulness  to a community, but who is himself so touched by,  so tainted by the very savagery that he tried  to tame, that he's often excluded from the community  once it's been created.  And you'll see a wonderful instance, a complex instance  of that, in tonight's film in the way the John Wayne  character, at the very end of the film,  is in a certain sense excluded from the community  that he has helped to defend.  One way to see many of these things  or to clarify many of these things  is to juxtapose-- or maybe as a way  of crystallizing this process I'm talking about whereby  a genre form can, in some sense, dramatize changing values.  I want to show you one scene.  Maybe I'll just end with the scene.  This is a scene from "McCabe and Mrs. Miller",  the film you're going to see in two weeks, a Western that  comes after the breakdown of the Hollywood system,  after the movies no longer have the responsibility  or the obligation-- no longer saw themselves  as having to speak to everyone-- a moment of great,  in many ways, extraordinary artistic freedom,  the period of the late '60s and through a good part  of the 1970s.  Many people would say it was a moment in American cinema  unrivaled for its complexity and its richness.  And one of the reasons it was such a rich moment  was that the movies had been liberated  from their responsibility to talk to the whole culture.  There was an irony connected to that because they  have smaller audience.  But it gave them a kind of political freedom,  a kind of moral freedom that they hadn't had before.  And I want to show you one scene.  One reason I'm choosing it is because it  will resonate for you when we come to "McCabe and Mrs.  Miller."  But it requires that you know one thing.  The scene, the iconic scene that I mentioned earlier  where two heroes or one hero and a bad guy  square off against each other on a dusty street to draw a gun  might be said to be the most recurring or the most--  the quintessential Western scene,  although there are others we might nominate  as almost as important.  And in order to understand the scene you're about to see,  you need to recognize that what lies  behind this very subversive version of the shoot out  are dozens, if not hundreds, of earlier  scenes in which heroic characters that we greatly  admire shoot down bad guys in the street, right?  Well, here's a scene from "McCabe and Mrs.  Miller" of this iconic moment.  Remember, "McCabe and Mrs. Miller"  comes after the consensus dispensation.  It's free not to be a consensus form.  But one reason I want to show you  this is I hope you can recognize that what  gives this scene its power is not-- it's  very brilliantly photographed and dramatized.  But what gives it its power has very little  to do with what it itself does.  What grants its enormous authority  are the dozens, if not hundreds, of prior scenes with which it's  in conversation, against which it is contrasting itself.  Because this scene of confrontation  between two individuals-- who has the faster gun,  right-- is, as I've suggested, the iconic moment  in the Western.  And it is, in the heroic Western,  in the traditional Western, it's a heroic moment  of individual self assertion in which good conquers evil.  Watch Robert Altman's version of this.  WOMAN: Careful.  Come back.  [VIDEO PLAYBACK]  [? -There's ?] shorty!  [INAUDIBLE]  [DOG WHINING]  [CLINKING]  [GUNSHOT]  -I wasn't trying to hit it.  The trick is not to hit it, but to make it float.  PROFESSOR: He's lying.  You're supposed to realize he's lying here.  He meant to hit it.  Here comes the cowboy who's just [INAUDIBLE].  All the prostitutes loved you.  -Hey, hold it, sonny.  -What?  -Hold up on your target practice a minute.  I don't want to get shot.  -Well, then get off the bridge, you saddle tramp.  -I want to buy some socks.  I got a long ride ahead of me.  -What's wrong with the socks you got on?  -I wore them out running around half-naked  in that whorehouse over there.  Actually quite a place.  You been there yet?  -Take off your boots and show me.  -You're joshing me.  -I said, take off your boots, and show me, eh, sucker?  -I ain't going to do that.  -What are you wearing that gun for?  -[INAUDIBLE] I just wear it.  Can't hit nothing with it.  -Well, that don't make no sense.  What kind of a gun is it?  -Colt.  -Them's big guns.  That's what I got.  Must be something wrong with it.  -Naw, it's me.  I just can't shoot good.  -Well, let me see it.  Come on.  Maybe I can fix it for you.  -OK.  PROFESSOR: OK.  [END PLAYBACK]  BOY: So what the scene-- what the scene does  is it turns on its head what we might say  are the central values or assumptions  that have lain behind such a seen  in dozens, if not hundreds, of prior Westerns.  And that's a distilled example of this process  of a conversation that goes on-- if it goes on  for a long enough time, the content of the conversation  can virtually reverse itself even though the genre remains  stable.  And that's one of the-- we might call  that the genius of genre, the genius of a genre form.  It has to do with-- it's a version of what  I mean when I talk about the cultural work  or the anthropological function that movies have. 