 Up until now, we have analyzed the motion of objects  that we treated as so-called point masses, where literally  all of the mass of the object was treated  as lying at a single point.  This is obviously an unrealistic idealization.  Real objects have spatial extent and come  in various sizes and shapes, some regular  and some highly irregular.  The mass distribution within these extended objects  might be smooth and uniform or highly non-uniform and lumpy.  Moreover, sometimes, we will be interested in simultaneously  analyzing a large system of particles or objects.  To deal properly with such situations,  it is necessary to introduce a new physical quantity called  the momentum, which is a vector that we traditionally denote  with the symbol P. For a single point mass,  the momentum is the product of the mass and the velocity  vector.  The form of Newton's second law that we have used so far,  F equals ma, is actually only true for the special case  of a point mass.  The more general form of the Newton's Second Law  is that F equals dp/dt, that is that the force is  equal to the time derivative of the momentum vector.  This is applicable to either a single particle  or to a system of particles.  This more general form provides us  the way to address extended objects  or multi-particle systems.  We will once again appeal to a calculus-like argument,  breaking down an extended distribution  into a large number of small elements,  treating each element separately, and then summing  the results.  As part of this process, we will introduce the concept  of the center of mass, a sort of mass weighted average position  for an extended object or system.  Momentum is also the first of several special measurable  quantities that we will discuss that obey special powerful  rules called conservation laws.  The other two quantities are energy and angular momentum.  Conservation laws are principles to provide that the given  measurable quantity remains unchanged during the evolution  of a system with time as long as certain requirements are  met, essentially the requirement that a system remains isolated.  With this restriction in place, the possible evolution  of motion of a particle or system of particles  is greatly restricted, simplifying its calculation.  We will see how this can be used to our advantage  in understanding what will happen. 