 The following content is provided under a Creative  Commons license.  Your support will help MIT OpenCourseWare  continue to offer high quality educational resources for free.  To make a donation or view additional materials  from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT OpenCourseWare  at ocw.mit.edu.  DAVID THORBURN: Good evening, people.  We continue our discussion of neorealism  by looking closely tonight at one classic instance  of the neorealist movement, the single most  famous film from that school, Bicycle Thieves.  Before I turn to talking a bit about aspects of Bicycle  Thieves itself, which I hope will frame  your viewing in a way that will help you get a lot out  of the first viewing of the film,  I want to say a few words about Vittorio De Sica himself.  I mentioned this afternoon that the neorealist movement,  although it was immensely influential  and continues to be influential, in fact, on realist filmmakers  and on documentarians, and it was especially in its earliest  phases, hailed globally as a very remarkable movement,  it incited criticism almost from the beginning inside Italy.  And I suggested it this afternoon  that some complaints against movie  essentially came from conservative forces  in the society that felt that the portrait of decay  and breakdown and dislocation that  was at the center of neorealist films-- after all, they  were about the contemporary world  and about the broken universe, the broken planet, at least  a broken Europe that we encountered after the war.  There were many kinds of conservatives in Italy  who felt that it promulgated a bad image for the society, that  made investment more difficult, that it was a kind of downer.  And this criticism was very powerful.  But what really undermined the movement  in terms of getting financing, the reason that the movement  sort of ended after about the time Umberto  D, the last of the truly neorealist films  that De Sica made, was produced in 1952.  It's life was very, very brief.  Many people would say that was the end of neorealism  although there are some films that  come after that have neorealist dimensions and elements in them  including some by Fellini.  Still the idea that the movement had a very short life  despite its immense influences it is an accurate one.  But what I had left out this afternoon  is an important qualification or addition  which is that the films also incited criticism  from the left.  When you see Bicycle Thieves you'll  see why that might be a surprising fact,  because the sympathies of the film  are so totally on the side of the underprivileged  and the underclasses of the culture.  It's difficult from our contemporary vantage point  to see what would've offended leftists.  But there was a very vigorous and theoretically  sophisticated communist movement in Italy in this period  as there continues to be today in some degree.  And many people on the left, especially communists,  but socialists as well, also complained  about neorealist films.  In particular about De Sica's films  because their complaint was not that  the difficulties of the World War were exposed.  They were perfectly happy with that.  But they were angry that there wasn't  a program for renovation.  What they were really angry about  was that there wasn't a Marxist or a socialist program built  into the films.  And it's always struck me as a very revealing and interesting  fact about the movement that it couldn't satisfy either left  or right, even though these films are  among the most powerful and compassionate films  about the lives of ordinary-- not just ordinary people,  but people without power, of people without control  over their lives that have ever been made.  So it's a curious fact.  It bothered De Sica all his life that he  seemed unable to please either side  in that political argument.  And at one point in an interview he said something--  if I could find my notes, I'd like to quote to you.  He said in response to a question  that asked him why do you think the socialists  and the communists were somewhat-- or at least  some socialists, so remember Zavattini  was a socialist, so he collaborated deeply and loved  De Sica and collaborated with him on his most important film.  So I don't mean that all socialists thought ill  of neorealism.  They did not.  But some did and certainly people on the far left  definitely did.  And here was De Sica's response to why-- he expressed  disappointment about this.  But his response really in a way is a critique  of the programmatic demands that these people  were making on his films.  He said, "My films are a struggle against the absence  of human solidarity."  You should think about this quotation  as you're watching tonight's film because as you'll  see in the film, the official institutions of the society  seem to have broken down or at least  to have become not effective.  They're overburdened.  They're somewhat indifferent.  It's mostly that there overburdened,  that the problems of the society are  too great for the institutional structures that  are in place to handle the problems.  But in any case as you're watching the film,  I think you'll notice not only that clearly  this breakdown of institutions are  very-- that we might expect to be  helpful to Ricci in his quest.  But what we will also discover is  that there are other forms of solidarity  that emerge in the film.  One of them is the solidarity of husband and wife.  Another is the solidarity very much tested in the film.  It's the great central theme of the film, the solidarity  of father and son.  And then there's also the solidarity  of what we might call neighbors or neighborhoods.  And you'll see how that element works  toward the end of the film in its remarkable and surprising  conclusion.  Now here's the quotation.  "My films are a struggle against the absence  of human solidarity against the indifference of society  towards suffering.  They are a word in favor of the poor and the unhappy."  One reason I like the statement is it so,  in a certain sense, unsystematic.  It shows-- they seem to me to be the words of an artist  not a political pamphleteer.  And they partly explain the richness, the resonance,  what I've been calling the multiplicity of Bicycle  Thieves.  There's a moment in Bicycle Thieves  about which Andre Bazin has written very beautifully.  The same critic that was a champion  of French poetic realism and of genre and of war of course  becomes one of the great champions  of Italian neorealism.  He can see that the Italian form of realism  is an extension and elaboration and in some ways  a deepening of the implications of poetic realism.  He's written brilliantly about the neorealists  and especially about De Sica.  There's one place in the film that he particularly  focuses on one of his essays.  It's-- I have to give away a small part of the plot in order  to explain this but it really won't trouble you  because the plot engine gets going so early in the film that  it's hardly a surprise.  In fact, you really know what's going to happen almost  from the opening dialogue in the film  where people are arguing about who has bicycles  and who does not.  The film is organized in a very elegant, relatively simple way.  It covers essentially three days of time.  The first day is the day in which Ricci gets  the commission for the job.  And then goes with his wife to get his bicycle out a hock.  And you'll see that they have to go  through certain kinds of tricks to find the money to do this.  And then once he has his bicycle he goes to work.  On his first day of work, guess what happens?  Someone guess who hasn't seen the film.  What do you think might get stolen?  OK, right.  His bicycle is stolen on the first day of work.  Now the fact is you're really not  surprised when it happens because almost  from that first scene you're aware that bicycles are  this incredibly precious object in the world  and yet also incredibly common.  And that's part of why it's such a resonant symbol in the film.  But there at the center of the film,  the most fundamental and most memorable parts of the film  involve what I'll call sort of the third segment.  I don't know that the segments are actually  equal in proportion in terms of time.  I think the third is the longer one.  But the third sequence is the Odyssey  or the quest in which Ricci and his young son  embark upon in order to recover his bicycle.  So he spends the whole-- I think he gets his job, gets his bike,  starts his job on Friday, has as bike stolen on Friday.  Or maybe it's on Saturday.  But in any case, he then gets his bike stolen.  He then asks for help from various sources  and the following day he spends the entire day  walking through the city of Rome looking for the thief trying  to find his bike.  He actually finds the thief as you'll  see in the grand climax of the film.  Although the thief turns out to be as miserable and at least as  much without prospects as poor Ricci himself.  Something very interesting happens  in that moment in the film because your sympathies  shift in some way to the thief in an odd way.  And you watch as his neighborhood  gathers around the thief to protect him  in certain respects.  So the heart of the film is this search  that the father and the son go on through the third day  of the plot looking for the bicycle.  As the day wears on, the father becomes more and more nervous,  more and more uneasy, more and more filled with anxiety.  The bike seems to him the solution to all difficulties.  And sometimes the son slows them down  and there are scenes in which the father becomes  annoyed or angry with the son but I'm  getting a bit ahead of myself.  So I won't repeat this again.  But I'll come back to these matters in the theme of fathers  and sons.  In any case there's a moment in this Odyssey where the father  and son are engaged in the search for the bicycle  when it's just after-- I think it's exactly at the moment when  there's a gigantic downpour, they're  caught in a terrible rainstorm.  I think in fact the rainstorm caused this.  The boy has to pee very badly.  And so he interrupts the quest to go and pee.  I mean he has- you have to go, you have to go.  But the father is so upset that the boy has slowed  him down that the slaps him.  And you get a sense that it's maybe the first moment  that this man has ever struck his son.  It's a tremendously fraught moment.  This is how Bazin talks about it.  And this is why I mention this moment now.  It's a way of illustrating this principle of texture  or openness to experience-- that's part of the De Sica's  vision of the world.  He is a socially conscious director  but he's not a programmatic or a politically preachy director.  So Bazin focuses on that moment I've just described to you.  He says, the boy needs to pee.  A downpour interrupt the chase.  Then he says quote, "The events are not necessarily  signs of something of the truth of which we  are to be convinced.  They all carry their own weight."  The rain, the need to pee, the father's anger, right?  "They all carry their own weight.  Their complete uniqueness.  They all have," Bazin so finely, "They all  have that ambiguity that characterizes any fact."  When a film is able to capture that ambiguity that  characterizes any fact, it's a work of art.  It can be programmatic if it does that.  And in fact the moment I'm describing  is really in some sense, a version  of what I've been calling the neorealist counter plot.  What constantly happens in good neorealist films  and what happens again and again the Bicycle Thief  is that the ongoing quest for the bicycle  is retarded or interrupted by various kinds of accident  disturbance, strange encounter.  So that the search for the bicycle  becomes something much larger than that  and every particular moment in the film has, as Bazin says,  its own uniqueness, its own-- you  don't feel that anything is in the film to further the plot  or to illuminate the character or to tell you  something about what political attitudes you should have.  Although by the time you're finished with the film  you do have a very coherent sense  of how the society is breaking down,  of how people are sustaining themselves,  about how difficult life is in postwar Italy.  You're aware of all of these things.  And aware of them with a concreteness and the clarity  that you wouldn't have if you read an abstract essay.  You've seen them embodied in a totally believable fiction.  But what gives the fiction it's authority, what gives it  its power is precisely that you don't  feel you're watching a sermon.  You don't feel you're watching something  in which some political moralist is beating you over the head  and telling you, oh you better love this poor guy, you better.  And in fact as the film goes on, one of the things you discover  is that there are nasty or bad sides to poor Ricci.  We understand that he's driven by economic anxiety that's  very deep and partly and certainly mitigates  his behavior.  But he behaves crudely and cruelly to his son,  never intending to.  Then of course there are moments when he recovers and tries  to make up with his son.  I'll come back to this in a moment.  So this passage from Bazin also calls attention  to what I think of as a signal feature in these films  and especially in the Bicycle Thief,  that power that any moment in the film  has to express a kind of complete uniqueness,  the ambiguity that characterizes reality itself.  Well, what I'd like to briefly do  is give you a partial account, a modest account of De Sica's  own career and then say some things  about the Bicycle Thieves.  De Sica was a stage actor.  He gave regimental performances when he served in the Army  in the first World War.  He became a stage hand right after the war and an actor  in 1923.  He joined a theater company in 1925, a touring company,  and he became a tremendous success  in a series of performances.  In 1927 he appeared on stage in Rome  in something called [? Sabun ?] Reviews  and I think it involved singing and dancing.  This was an unbelievable success and turned him  into a kind of a matinee idle or at least a theater icon.  He made his first film in that same year in 1922 as an actor.  And his first success came-- he continued  to act in films intermittently for the next decade  but he didn't become a recognizably serious film actor  until his first major success in 1932.  Then for 10 years, he's a kind of matinee idle Italian movies.  He made over 40 films in the period  as an actor between 1932 and 1942--  a very handsome man as some of you may know if you've seen him  and capable of great subtlety as an actor.  This may help to explain why he was such a great director  of nonprofessional actors, because he knew intuitively  I think, how to bring out the performance  from someone who was not trained in performing, in acting.  He begins to direct in 1940 and makes  a series of moments in interesting but forgettable  films I suppose.  His first really significant film from one angle  anyway, especially if we're interested in the development  of neorealism, is a film he makes in 1942, co-screenwriter  Cesare Zavattini, it's entitled The Children Are Watching Us.  It's-- I've seen the film.  It's not a great film.  But it's an interesting film.  And there are some remarkable moments it.  The title tells you something about the neorealist commitment  to focus on the under privileged and the dis-empowered  in society.  Many neorealist films focused directly on children.  And The Children Are Watching Us is one such film.  And it almost announces the idea that children  are among the victims of society because they are subjected  not only to all the political and social authorities  of the society, but also to the arbitrary  authority of their own parents and their own immediate family  environment.  So The Children Are Watching Us announces  this interest in the disenfranchised and especially  in children.  It's a film about the breakup of a middle class  marriage mostly told through the eyes of children.  So there are certain things, certain behaviors  on the part of the adults are never fully explained  because you witness and experience  the film through not just the eyes  but through the perceptions the understanding,  the sensibility of children who are somewhat confused  about what they're seeing.  The film that established him as an international figure  and established neorealism as an international movement  was one that to De Sica and Zavattini  collaborated on in 1946.  It was entitled Shoeshine.  I sometimes have been tempted to show Shoeshine in this course,  even though it's a much less perfect film than Bicycle  Thieves because in its own way, it's so powerful and moving.  One of the most interesting things about neorealism,  apart from the fact that it was so short lived,  is how relevant the films still feel today.  If you watched Shoeshine or another of the films  that I've listed here on Umberto D which  is about the problems that people who have gone  into-- of the old, people who are retired, pensioners,  and the problems they face when there is horrific inflation.  De Sica dedicated the film to his father.  It's about an old man who was very proud.  He used to be-- he dresses very well.  But he's tremendously isolated.  He's terribly poor.  He's almost reduced to begging in the course of the film.  There's even a moment near the end of the film  where he contemplates and then pulls back from suicide.  But watching that film today, it feels  much less dated than some films that  are much later than-- were produced 10, 15, 20, 25  years after it because the theme is so relevant.  Because we know that in society today there  are so many-- in all of a Western societies  but especially in the United States--  there are pensioners who can't make in ends meet.  The same thing is true, I think, in some degree  of the role of the fate of children in modern society.  So Shoeshine, although it has a very melodramatic and violent  ending, it's an immensely powerful film.  Essentially it's a story about two boys, two Roman street  urchins who are taking advantage of in some sense  by their own relatives who are trafficking in black market  goods.  It's set in the same moment at the end of the war.  In fact, the film opens with these urchins  trying to make a living as shoeshine boys.  That's why where the title comes from.  And these shoeshine boys are wandering the streets of Rome,  going up to American soldiers who are dominating the streets,  it's still an occupied city, asking soldiers  if they want shoe shines.  The children are unbelievable victims.  They're very close friends.  They end up buying a racehorse, a broken down old racehorse  that can't race anymore and they stable it someplace.  They are very excited about their possession of this horse.  There's some early scenes in which  you see them riding on the horse with tremendous joy  and so forth.  But of course this is the dawn before the miserable night.  Because what then happens is the kids  are taken advantage of by one their-- by a close relative.  They're involved in black market activities.  The adults use the children because they  know that children are less vulnerable than they  would be if they're caught.  The children are caught.  They're sent to reform school.  Most of the film takes place in the reform school.  You see these two bright-eyed, beautiful young children,  maybe 10 years old, who are the fastest and closest of friends  when they go into jail, slowly breaking down.  You see their humanity being beaten out of them  by the conditions in the reform-- in the children's  prison.  It's a terrible disturbing film in part  because you could see that the people who are running  the prison actually mean well.  They're not vicious, evil people who want to harm children.  The system seems designed simply to cause more harm than good  and to destroy the vitality and optimism.  And when I say the film ends melodramatically,  one child strikes out at his erstwhile best friend  and knocks him down a bank and he dies.  So he in effect accidentally murders a person who  had been his dearest friend.  I think it's a failure in the film.  I think that you didn't need the murder for the meanings  of the film to be available.  I think that De Sica learned something from that.  When you watch the ending of the Bicycle Thief,  one of the things I hope you'll ask yourself  is why is it so apparently undramatic?  And why does that undramatic ending  in the end seems so profound, so moving, so meaningful?  It's as if De Sica sort of learned his lesson.  It's as if he drove his point home too heavily  at the end of Shoeshine.  He realized that to have a truly organic text that  did what Bazin wants text to do, reflect the unique  the unique ambiguity of every experience.  The ending of the Bicycle Thieves  does that much more effectively as I hope you'll watch  for when you you're watching the film.  Shoeshine made a tremendous impact  and it won the first of four Academy Awards  that De Sica won as best director.  This was for the best foreign film of the year in 1946  and it put new realism on the map.  Then two years later Zavattini and De Sica  followed with what I suppose we could call their masterpiece,  Bicycle Thieves.  I want to say that this is not a complete-- remotely complete  list of De Sica's films.  I've just listed some highlights here  because I wanted to give you a sense of his work.  I mentioned Umberto D already, the last neorealist film  according to many people, and a very moving one  about an old pensioner.  The film Two Women stars Sophia Loren,  one of the great sort of pulchritudinous Italian movie  stars of the '50s and '60s.  It got a lot of attention.  There were many other interesting films that he made.  But one of his great triumphs was the very last we made.  That's what I want to mention it.  Zavattini returned to do an uncredited coscreenplay  work on Finzi-Continis and you can feel Zavattini's hand  in many moments in the film.  It's an adaptation of a novel.  As some of you may know, it's really a Holocaust film.  It's about the buildup to the Holocaust.  The Finzi-Continis are very wealthy Italian Jews.  The story is about a poor young Jewish scholar who is,  because of the anti-Jewish laws that  are developing in fascist Italy, is barred  from using the public library.  He's a very gifted young scholar.  He's in his early '20s.  So he finds out that this very wealthy aristocratic family,  also Jewish, the Finzi-Continis have a magnificent library.  The Finzi-Continis open their library to him  since he's barred from going into the public library.  Of course what happens is, you might guess this too,  it's a wonderful novel although the film is even more beautiful  I think.  He falls in love with the Finzi-Continis' daughter.  Right, so it's a class issue.  The poor boy, rich girl.  So the foreground of the film is this cross class romance.  But in the background of the film  it's something like cabaret but not as dramatic, not as overt.  Because what's going on in the background of the film  is the growth of fascism.  The end of the film ends with many of the characters we've  gotten to know very well, both young and old, all of them  Jews, some very aristocratic and some  at the bottom of the social hierarchy,  all being herded together being ready to be shipped off  to the camps.  You don't actually go-- the final scenes of the film  have them in the railroad station being prepared  for their final journey.  The film is also full of comedy, just as some of the passages  that I showed you in clips from this afternoon mix comedy  with socially serious themes.  This is even truer of The Garden of the Finzi-Continis  One of the reasons I like the film so much is that it's  a return to the energies and the moral passion that had marked  De Sica's earlier career.  And I think that my own feeling is  the The Garden of the Finzi-Continis  is one of the great European films.  It certainly would be on my list of the best  15 or 20 European films of the sound era.  I think many of you would find it very instructive and moving.  But I think especially so after you  saw some of the truly neorealist films, the early neorealist  films.  One can't really call The Garden of the Finzi-Continis  a neorealist film although it has many elements in common  with those earlier texts.  So De Sica was a remarkable man, a significant actor,  a great director.  He directed 25 films in his career,  won four Oscars for best foreign film.  He acted in more than 150 films, mostly  light, comic social matters kind of roles.  But there's one exception I perhaps should mention.  Playing in a film for his friend,  Roberto Rossellini in 1959, Rossellini's greatest film,  a film called General Della Rovere, De Sica plays the lead  and it's probably his most memorable performance.  It's a very, very subtle and good film  about political ambiguities and conflicts  of loyalty, human frailty, and human inadequacies  in a way that's characteristic of the best neorealist work.  So those are all films I recommend or urge you  to consider watching in your leisure time.  Let me say a few words now about Bicycle Thieves.  I've already implied or actually said  a part of what I want to say so what I think I can be briefer  than I had originally planned.  Let me remind you again about the structure.  I mentioned to you that the structure of the film  is elegantly simple, that the amount of time the passes  is very compressed.  And that's helpful because the time compression  makes you aware of the urgency of the quest  that the father and the son are engaged in when they're  searching for the bicycle.  So one way-- and as the story unfolds, a number of things  begin to happen.  The quest for the bicycle becomes a kind of Odyssey  in which several things happen.  One is the film takes you on an exploration of Rome.  It's like one of the great city films.  It visits the city.  It explores the city.  You see different-- it's not just that you  see police stations and religious institutions  and the catacombs underneath the city.  Where the unions meet, and where Ricci  first goes to get help from Union members who promised him  that they'll find his bike, very easily,  and they give him a plan and he's very excited  and then the next morning when they  follow the instructions of the union, the boss doesn't help.  So the unions are breaking down as well as the church, as well  as certain kinds of welfare organizations in the state  and so on.  So one thing the film becomes then is a kind of travelogue,  a kind of exploration of the city,  the city's geography as well as the city's make up in some way.  You go into different neighborhoods  and you hear-- I think Italians can  pick up the different neighborhoods  speech patterns in the film, at least  I've been told this made by native Italians.  So it's a kind of travelogue in one sense.  It explores this place.  And part of the exploration of course  involves certain ancillary or other themes  that are organically linked to the story of going  through the city looking for the bicycle.  One of course is what we might call  the social themes of the film.  Because as the protagonists make their way  through the city searching for the bicycle what you encounter  are little vignettes that tell you something  about the social hierarchies of the society, about the efficacy  or in efficacy of its institutions.  I won't go into great detail here.  I hope you'll draw your own conclusions  and name some of the specific examples that  reinforce this general idea.  But I do want to mention at least  one moment in this Odyssey.  One of the most dramatic and disturbingly comic  moments in the film occurs when Ricci and his son  actually think they've seen the thief.  They think they recognize him and they follow him.  And they get to essentially a mission  where relatively well-off, self-satisfied Christians  are serving meals to the indigent and the poor, right?  Ricci gets into this institution not because he sort of wants  the meal or because he needs the religious uplift  but because he's chasing his thief.  And he finds once he's in there that he can't get.  It turns out that in this institution that  not only do the poor have to pay for their meal  by agreeing to all kinds of religious behaviors, prayers,  and other kinds of things.  But they're also locked into the building.  They're not allowed eat, they're not  allowed to leave at least until they finish eating.  Maybe they're not allowed to leave  until they can be checked to make sure they're not  stealing the soup bowls.  But in any case, it's a very interesting moment  because you can see that even the people who  would intend to do well in society  often do more harm than good.  And of course the implication is that  the traditional religious institutions  and traditional religious arrangements  are not sufficient to take care of  or adequately to respect the difficulties of the poor.  That's just one such moment.  There are number of others.  In fact there is one other moment  I should mention as a kind of contrast.  I've said that we see many instances in which we  understand that the larger institutions of society  like the police or the religious system or the union system  are breaking down or not really helping people.  But I will but I've also said that there  are some other sort of unofficial, and  non-institutionalized sources of solidarity and comfort  that emerge in the course of the film  and I hope you'll watch for them and think about what  their significance is.  But there's one moment which complicates this argument  because we can see the social institutions of society not  actually functioning effectively but at least showing  some compassion.  It's an astonishingly vivid, meaningful moment  in the film, another one of these moments so full  of multiplicity that the meanings are so deeply embedded  in what you dramatically see that sometimes you don't even  step back to generalize on the meaning of what you've seen.  This is a scene very early in the film  where Ricci actually goes to retrieve his bicycle.  His wife has figured out a way-- basically what she figures out  is they sell her dowry.  She has a couple of fancy silk sheets.  They take them to the hockshop, and they pawn the sheets  in order to get enough money to get the bicycle out of hock.  It means they're going to be sleeping  on mattresses and but so what, this is more important right?  You see Ricci and his wife go to the pawn shop which is clearly  run by the state.  Is not like a private pawn-- it's  obviously a city institution of some kind.  And they bring the linen up to the guy and he looks at them  and he says, OK, I'll give you this much money.  And they need a little bit more because they  need to get the bike out of hock so they ask him for more money.  And he looks at it, he says, oh, it's not really worth it  but, OK.  And it's an act of generosity on his part  because he didn't have to do it.  He gives them just enough money for this stuff so that they  can get his bike out of hock.  And then, completely silent, you see him pick this material up,  this pawned bedding, this pawned linen,  and he turns around-- I think he does-- he may give it  to another character.  I haven't looked at this scene a year or two  so I don't remember the exact-- you'll recognize the scene.  I think it's the same man who does it or he may give it  to someone else.  The material-- the three or four sheets that are involved  are taken by someone.  He walks to the back of a room, and he  begins to climb a ladder.  As he climbs you realize that what he's climbing up is-- he's  climbing a ladder which is leaning  against a series of shelves that seem to go on endlessly.  They seem to be in an auditorium the size  of the city of Pittsburgh.  And they go up endlessly high and every single shelf,  every single inch of space on the shelf  is filled with bedding as if the entire city of Rome  has pawned its bedding, as if everybody in Rome  is sleeping on mattresses.  Now the film never makes a comment about this.  No one in the film says anything about it.  But it's an unbelievably resonant and rich moment.  And it's also-- it does further the sort  of social themes of the film.  But it occurs in a moment in which you will also  see the pawn broker showing a moment of compassion  and generosity.  And if you did not show that generosity  they wouldn't have been able to get the bicycle.  So it's a complicated moment.  But if all this linen has been pawned,  there's some question about whether or not  the city services are doing much good for anybody.  The city's in obvious trouble if nobody  has any bed linen any longer.  The implication is this is an unbelievably impoverished  and damaged environment.  But it's done in such a quiet way there's even something  almost comic about the sense you have  of the endless number of these things.  Even the idea that you have to distinguish one from the other  seems from our vantage point a bit silly,  even though each one has a ticket on it,  each one belongs to an individual family.  So watch for that moment.  It has some of that ambiguity that Bazin talks about.  So the structure of the film is organic in the sense  that nothing that happens in the film  doesn't seem to arise naturally out  of the needs of the characters.  We have to find our new bike.  And in the course of their travels other things happen.  The boy has to pee, they get hungry.  They have to eat.  Or sometimes it rains, they have to get out of the rain.  Right?  And that becomes part of the ongoing sort  of organic development of the story.  You never once feel, I think, in this film  that any event has been imposed from the outside.  Every event seems to arise naturally  out of the circumstances and nature of the characters.  And that's why I call it organic.  It's a deeply organic way of thinking about the material.  But it's organic in another way too course  because it's deeply coherent.  When you finally finished the film, when you step back,  you say, OK, yes the film slowed down here.  And yes, the film seemed to generate what Thorburn  calls a counter plot here.  Nonetheless, taken as a whole, there's  a profound moral and thematic coherence  in this organically fluid movie.  So the structure of the film is part of its essence.  And although I haven't put this on the outline  because we've talked about this so often already,  pay attention to the Renoir-ish type camera behavior.  The film's visual style is like Jean Renoir's.  There's a kind of elegant restlessness  to the camera that's very much a part of what the film achieves.  So in talking about the social themes  all I meant to call your attention  to was the extent to which in a variety of ways,  the film calls attention to the miserably endangered  circumstances of ordinary people in this broken down, war  torn environment.  It also looks to those, or seems to find without even looking,  to dramatize or reveal those sources of support  and sustenance that get us through bad times.  As you're watching the ending of the film,  ask yourself what these things mean.  I won't actually tell you whether he  recovers the bike or not, let you see that for yourself.  But ask yourself, whether or not he recovers the bike,  would it have made any difference?  Does it matter given what the film is finally saying  to us in those final images?  Well, character.  This is one of the great films about character,  I think, especially about the relation  between the father of the son.  They're at the very center of the film.  I've already said in a way that this Odyssey that they go on  is a travelogue.  It teaches us about the geography,  social circumstances, social arrangements, and class system  and institutional systems of Rome.  It does that.  But it's also an Odyssey in which the father of the son  get to know each other in a deeper and in many ways,  much more disturbing way than has ever  happened to them before.  The most poignant and terrible thing about this film in fact,  is that the Odyssey I've been describing  through Rome with his son, by Ricci,  is also an initiation story, a story about growing up.  But what happens to Ricci's son in this film  doesn't happen to most young boys until they're much older.  And it happens gradually, not all at once.  But what Ricci's son discovers in the course of this day  are his father's flaws.  He discovers things about his father  that no boy really wants to know even if he's 67  years old like your professor.  And he discovers these things about his father in the most  stressful circumstances.  His father's violent toward him, his father  is indifferent toward him.  Then there are moments when after his father feels  terrible anxiety and grief over the way  he's treated him where his father tries to make up  with him and you can see the boy not wanting to let them do it.  It's unbelievably rich.  And I don't think anyone who pays attention to this  will fail to recognize the interactions between the father  and son as unbelievably true, marvelously  accurate to the way in which loving parents  and loving children often interact with each other.  Because they have many moments where they're really not  happy with each other at all.  What the boy discovers about his father  are some things that no child ever  wants to know about his father.  Not just that he's flawed, but he's deeply, deeply flawed,  that he's capable of really terrible behavior.  And the boy is-- something happens in this Odyssey.  It's one of the subtlest things about the film.  The basic relations between fathers and sons are reversed.  We find that the son, this little child,  is twice in the film in the position of having  to rescue his father.  I'm simplify certain things because I don't  want to give away the plot.  But you'll see how this works out in the film.  I mean there are two moments in the film in which Ricci  fate would be far more dire than it is because of his son's  presence.  His son, in a sense, is his Savior.  The fathers are supposed to protect their sons  not the reverse.  Part of the meaning of this adventure  is that Ricci has been reduced to such a miserable level that  even has to rely on his son's help in order to get by.  Both of them, the father and son experience this reversal.  So it's a psychologically traumatic and deeply moving  experience.  Although don't misunderstand.  I'm not suggesting that the child doesn't  come to terms-- he does come to terms with what he learns.  I think is quite remarkable.  I mean I would have had trouble with what  that boy comes to terms with as an adult  but he does it as a child.  But I think of course it's also believable as you'll see.  So the film is profound and serious  about the social circumstances of postwar Italy.  Is profound and serious about the indifference  of certain kinds of institutional arrangements  to the real miseries of human experience.  And it is a powerful and deep exploration of human character  and especially, centrally, the relation  between Ricci and his son.  The relation between fathers and sons--  becomes a kind of one of the great parables of the relations  between adults and children.  It's one of the great father and son stories of all time.  Let me conclude by saying a couple of words  about the title.  I mean there's much more in the film I wish I can talk about.  But by this time in the course if you  can't get this stuff yourself, I haven't done my job.  I hope all of you are watching films much more attentively  and carefully than you had before.  I hope that your enjoyment has been  increased rather than decreased by what  you've learned in this course.  Let the Bicycle Thief be a test.  Because in many ways it's not kind of film most of you  guys would go out to watch.  First of all it's in black and white.  Second it's more than 50 years old.  But I think you'll I think you'll  recognize that it hasn't aged, that the film is  as compelling now as it was when it was-- maybe even more  compelling now than when it was made  because some of the political turmoil has disappeared.  There's no longer the taint of fascism hanging  over Italian artistic productions  as they were at the end of the war.  There's a historical sense of the importance  of this movement.  So maybe we can look at these neorealist films with a more  objective eye than the original audiences could.  In any case the title is an interesting one.  When it was first translated into English,  and in fact it's still widely known,  you might have noticed a slips of the tongue on my part  where I started to call it the Bicycle Thief.  And the reason is, it's still often called that.  When it was originally brought into the United States  and translated both in Great Britain  and in the United States, it was called The Bicycle Thief.  Now the Italian is in the plural.  It's Ladri di Bicilette.  Thieves of the bicycle would be the literal translation.  Right now the question is why the plural?  I think you could imagine the answer just from that opening  sequence that I showed you this afternoon.  Why would it be plural?  Why would the title be plural?  One of the reasons is from the very opening sequence,  we see that everybody-- that the bicycle  is a very ambiguous and complicated symbol in the film.  Symbol is a bad word because it's  such an actuality that it seems pretentious  to call it a symbol.  You see hundreds of maybe thousands  of bicycles in the film.  That's part of what makes Ricci's loss of the bicycle so  poignant.  You have the sense as he's walking around the city,  oh my God, everybody has a bicycle.  There are 10 million bicycles in this city.  Poor Ricci can't find one, can find--  there's something horrific about the idea that an item so common  could still for Ricci you be so precious, as to constitute  his livelihood or threaten against his livelihood  if he can't find the bicycle.  You can guess now based on what I've already  said one reason for why the title is plural.  Why?  As Ricci's walking around looking for his bicycle,  walking through a city full of hundreds  and thousands of bicycles, what might he think?  What might you think if you needed the bicycle desperately?  Why not pinch one?  Why not thieve?  So one of the reasons that the title is plural  is that Ricci is one of the thieves.  I'm only suggesting that he's a thief by sort  of psychological inclination.  He looks lovingly-- as you'll see,  the plot makes this even more explicit.  I don't want to give away the plot.  I will.  He actually does in a certain sense become a thief.  But long before he becomes a literal thief  and actually puts his hands on someone else's bicycle,  you and I might even think some people in the audience  may get the idea before Ricci does.  When you're watching this guy, so terrible, looking  every place for his bicycle, he's surrounded by bicycles,  sees inundated by bicycles.  After he recovers the bicycle, before he goes to work,  on his wife asks him to take into a special location.  She wants to thank someone.  It turns out, that he had-- and they get on the bike,  she rides behind him and he rides over on the bike.  And he waits outside this place while his wife goes up.  His wife is taking a long time.  So he leans his bike against the wall.  He starts to go up the stairs.  He looks, and sees his bike is vulnerable so he walks down,  he finds a kid, gives the kid, I think he gives the kid a coin,  and tells the kid to guard the bike.  And then he starts walking up the stairs again.  This is very early in the film.  And think how clever this is.  You're aware of how vulnerable the bike is from that moment.  This is a day before it's stolen, right?  You're aware of how precious is and as he ascends  the stairs you actually become afraid  that his bicycle might be stolen.  So one of the reasons the title is ambiguous  is I think in the end, the title encompasses not just  the thief who steals Ricci's bike  and not just Ricci himself who contemplates becoming  a thief in his desperation, but also the audience which becomes  complicit Ricci's impulse to criminality because we  are ourselves think God, steal a goddamn bike.  Take the bike.  Stop worrying about it.  Get it.  Get away.  There's a bike you could take.  And I think anyone watching the film  has this feeling after a relatively short time  so that we are bicycle thieves as well.  So part of the subtlety of the title-- and you'll  see as the film works itself out, I've already implied this.  When they finally catch up the thief, alleged thief,  the guy they think is the thief, he  turns out to be an even more miserable specimen  than poor Ricci.  He's an epileptic.  He's out of work.  He has to be protected by this community.  His mother's very protective of him.  There's some modest minor possibility that he's acting,  that he's faking his mental problems  and maybe faking everything.  But I don't think so.  You could judge yourself whether what is in any case,  any case surely true, is that the neighborhood coalesces  around him because Ricci and his son  are strangers and are attacking someone  from their neighborhood.  So when this happens, one of the things you'll feel  is not just that the thief Ricci was  going after deserves some sympathy too.  You begin to feel some sense that his difficulties are-- not  that you excuse his thievery-- but you understand it  in a deep and generous way I think.  That complicates your sense of who the thieves are  and what thieves are like.  And then you've come to recognize that Ricci  is a potential thief.  And you care about Ricci.  You see what a loving father he is, how desperate he  is to take care of his family.  So you sympathize with him.  And then, you realize if you've been thinking  about it, that of course you've been  covering bicycles yourself.  So the audience and the real thief  and Ricci the would-be thief are all implicated together  as if what he's saying is that our common humanity is  what bicycle thieves suggest.  And that's one of the reasons that the title  needs to be plural because the film is not  about a single bicycle thief.  It's about the bicycle thief in all of us.  Enjoy the film. 