 ADAM MARTIN: All right, let's get started.  So I'm starting with this video here.  What's happening here is there's this mouse,  and you see there's like this fiber optic cable going  into its brain.  And the mouse is asleep right now.  And now the researchers are shining light  into its brain, a specific region of the brain,  to activate specific neurons in order  to test whether they function in arousal.  And here, you see the mouse is going to wake up.  There it goes.  It's awake now.  So for today's lecture, we're going  to work towards understanding how this experiment works.  And we're going to talk about how neurons function  and how researchers are able to control that function in order  to modify behavior--  in this case, the arousal of this mouse.  OK, so this is going to involve a particular type of cell  in our body, which is the neuron.  And neurons are highly specialized cells  that have a function to transmit information from one  part of the body to another.  And so neurons are highly polarized cells,  which you can see here.  On the left of this neuron, you see this arbor of protrusions,  which are called dendrites.  And then on this side of the cell body,  you see a single extension, which  is an axon, and then the terminus of the axon over here.  And this nerve cell transmits information  in a single direction.  It will transmit information from this side to this side.  And these neurons are able to communicate with each other.  And they communicate at the ends of the neuron, which  are known as synapses, which I'll come back to  and talk about later on in the lecture.  So neurons could be making synapses on this side  and also making synapses on this side with other neurons.  So to start to unpack the function of this neuron--  and I should highlight that this flow of information  can occur over very long distances, right?  Your sciatic nerve extends from the base of your spine  all the way down into your foot, OK?  So that axon is one meter in length.  So that's an extremely long distance  to transmit information along a single cell.  And so we're going to go from thinking about how signals are  transmitted in single cells, and this will  evolve electrical signaling.  Then we'll talk about synapses and how synapses function  to communicate between neurons.  And this is going to involve also  sort of understanding how certain antidepressants,  like Prozac, work.  And then we'll end by talking about how  researchers did this experiment to wake up the mouse.  And it all starts with something that I told you  about at the beginning of the semester, which  is that the plasma membrane separates  distinct compartments the outside of the cell  from the cytoplasm.  And there are distinct ion concentrations  on either side of this boundary.  So we're starting now talking about a single neuron cell.  And we're going to talk about a type of signal  known as an action potential.  Oh, that's right.  So we're going to talk about an action potential.  And what an action potential is, is it's  an electrical signal that travels  the length of the neuron.  So this action potential, I'll abbreviate this AP.  So when I refer to AP, I'm not referring  to advanced placement, but action potential, OK?  So this is an electrical signal that  travels the length of the axon and the neuron.  And so in order to have an electrical signal propagate,  we need some sort of electrical property  that the cell has that enables this.  And so I showed you or I told you earlier in the semester  how sodium ions are concentrated on the outside of the cell  and potassium ions are concentrated on the inside.  You see here's the sodium gradient here,  potassium gradient here.  And now I'm going to tell you how it is that this happens,  because this is thermodynamically not favored,  right?  These ions would prefer, by diffusion,  to be equal concentrations on both sides of this plasma  membrane, which means that the cell to shift this  from equilibrium has to expend energy  to set up this situation.  And so in the plasma membrane of the cell, there is a protein.  It's an integral membrane protein  and sits inside the plasma membrane.  So this here is the plasma membrane.  And this integral membrane protein  is called a sodium potassium ATPase.  So it's going to have a subunit that hydrolyzes ATP to ADP.  And the protein uses the energy of ATP hydrolysis  to pump sodium ions up their concentration gradient.  So the sodium ions are going out of the cell.  And this is going against the flow  that sodium would normally like to take,  which would be going downstream.  And it pumps potassium ions into the cytoplasm such  that there's a higher concentration of potassium  ions in the cytoplasm, OK?  So these neurons expend a huge--  a quarter of their ATP is used by pumping ions like this, such  that there is gradients of ions across the plasma membrane.  Now, if one sodium ion was pumped out  for every potassium ion pumped in,  there'd be no charge difference between the exterior  and the cytoplasm.  But what happens in the plasma membrane  is that in addition to the sodium potassium ATPase,  there are other channels that are present.  There are sodium channels.  These are mostly closed, but there are some potassium  channels that are leaky.  And they're basically leaking potassium from the cytoplasm  out into the exoplasm, OK?  And if you have positive charges going out the cell,  then the inside of the membrane is going  to have a net negative charge.  And the outside of the membrane is going  to have a net positive charge.  And this charge across the membrane,  where you have positive on the outside  and minus on the inside--  I should label this exterior, and this is cytoplasm.  This voltage difference is known as a membrane potential.  So this is a membrane potential.  And it's an electrical potential across the membrane.  If you're an electrical engineer,  you can think of the plasma membrane as a capacitor, OK?  So this plasma membrane is holding this charge difference  across it.  And so there's a voltage across the membrane.  And in a resting state, the cell's resting potential  is negative 70 millivolts.  So if the cell is not getting stimulated by something  like a neurotransmitter, the resting potential  is negative 70 millivolts, where the inside is negative  and the outside is positive, OK?  So now I just want to define some terms that  are going to be useful for us when we  talk about action potentials.  So when there's this negative inside potential,  a negative inside potential is referred to as polarized.  So it's polarized because there's  a polarity across this membrane, where one side is positive  and the other side is negative, OK?  So polarized refers to if there's  a negative inside potential.  So the resting state of the side is there's a polarized--  it's polarized.  However, the cell can lose this polarity  and not have a charge differential,  or it can flip and be positive on the inside.  And when that happens, if there's either zero or positive  inside potential, this is referred to as depolarized.  Anyone have an idea as to how the cell would  flip the potential?  What would have to happen in the plasma membrane  to flip this potential and depolarize the cell?  Yes, Stephen?  AUDIENCE: You could open the ion channels.  ADAM MARTIN: So Stephen suggested opening ion channels.  Which ion channels would you open?  AUDIENCE: The sodium channels.  ADAM MARTIN: Yeah.  So Stephen suggested if you open these,  it's going to depolarize the cell.  Because remember, sodium is high on the outside, out here.  And so if you open these channels,  positive ions are going to flow in.  And that's going to make this less negative and this less  positive, OK?  So this is the situation here, where these sodium channels  open, and the sodium channels-- or the sodium  ions rushing in is going to create a depolarization,  where you now flip the potential.  And there's a greater positive charge  on the inside of the plasma membrane.  Everyone see how?  Because the sodium ions are going to just go downstream.  They're higher concentration out here.  So just by opening these channels,  the cell doesn't have to do any work to do this.  Sodium is just going to flow down its gradient  into the cytoplasm.  So what an action potential is, is it's  a transient depolarization of the nerve cell.  So the Action Potential, or AP, is a transient depolarization  of the neuron, which means it doesn't just  depolarize and stay depolarized, but it depolarizes and then  restores itself back to the resting polarity.  And so what you see when you measure the voltage  across the plasma membrane in a neuron,  you see that it can spike and depolarize,  but then it's rapidly restored to its resting state, OK?  So it's a transient process.  When we think about the neuron at higher resolution, what  you're going to see is not only is it transient,  but it's also a traveling wave that propagates along  the entire length of the cell.  So this is also a traveling wave.  And one thing that you can notice about these neurons,  or the action potentials here, is that they all  depolarize to the same extent.  So they all depolarize to this positive 50 millivolts.  And so this illustrates a key property  of neurons, in that the level of activity of a neuron  is not determined by the size of this action potential.  This action potential is an all-or-nothing event.  It either happens or it doesn't.  And when it happens, it depolarizes to the same level.  So the action potential is all or nothing.  You can think of it as a binary signal.  And therefore, the way that neurons  encode sort of the magnitude of activation  is not through the level of depolarization  of a single action potential, but it  is able to distinguish between different frequencies of action  potentials that are propagating along the neuron.  So signal strength, in this case,  is related to the frequency of action potentials firing.  So now we're going to unpack how it  is a nerve cell fires an action potential  and how it propagates along the entire cell length, right?  In the case of the sciatic nerve,  this has to happen across an entire meter, OK?  That's a very long distance to propagate  this change in electrical signal, at least for a cell.  And so we're going to talk about the mechanism.  And I'm going to start at the beginning, when this action  potential initiates.  So we'll start at the initiation of the action potential.  So how is it that this nerve cell  is told to start depolarizing at the dendrites?  Because there's going to be another neuron here,  which is going to communicate to this neuron over here  to tell it to start depolarizing.  It does this at the location known as the synapse, which  is basically sort of the connection between the two  neurons.  And the way this process is initiated  is similar to the type of signaling  that you saw in the past few lectures, where you have  a ligand and a receptor, OK?  In this case, the ligand is going  to be what's known as a neurotransmitter, which  is a small molecule.  And I'll show you some later on.  And the receptor is going to be a receptor that  binds to this ligand.  But in this case, rather than being something  like a G protein coupled receptor or a receptor tyrosine  kinase, the receptor is going to be an ion channel, OK?  So the receptor is going to be an ion channel.  And so you see one example in the slide  up here, where here's a receptor.  And these receptors are what are known as ligand-gated ion  channels.  In this case, it's a sodium channel.  So it's going to be--  whether or not it's open depends on the presence of the ligand.  So if we take a neurotransmitter like serotonin,  if it's not bound to the receptor,  the receptor is closed.  But if serotonin binds to the receptor,  it opens up the channel, which can selectively  let in a type of ion--  in this case, sodium.  In this case, this is an activating channel,  because letting in sodium is going  to depolarize the cell, OK?  So this ligand receptor binding uses a ligand-gated--  there's a ligand-gated sodium channel.  And it's this ligand-gated sodium channel which  starts the depolarization.  So that's how you sort of knock over the first domino, right?  But then there has to be some mechanism  to propagate this along the length of a very long cell.  And so I'll tell you this involves a different type  of sort of signaling mechanism from what you're  used to thinking about, because this involves a different type  of an ion channel.  And it's called a voltage gated.  And I'll abbreviate voltage gated just VG.  And in this case, it will be a sodium channel.  So what's a voltage-gated sodium channel?  This is a voltage-gated sodium channel here.  And you can see, in the resting state of the cell,  this channel is closed.  And it's closed because of this red rod structure  that's positively charged.  That's a positively charged alpha helix  that is a part of this protein and is  embedded in the membrane.  But this alpha helix is positioned down  towards the cytoplasm, because it's positively charged.  And the cytosolic face of the plasma membrane  is negatively charged, OK?  And the confirmation of this protein  then depends on the charge across this membrane.  Because when there is depolarization,  that shifts the position of this alpha helix, such that now it  shifts up towards the exterior face of the plasma membrane.  And that opens the channel, which lets sodium ions rush in,  OK?  Again, sodium ions here, they're always rushing downstream.  They're concentration gradient.  So in this case, whether or not this channel is open or closed  depends not on the presence of a ligand,  but on the membrane potential across the plasma membrane.  So these voltage-gated sodium channels,  they're opened by depolarization.  And then the question becomes, if you  open these channels at the very end of the neuron,  how do you get it such that this electrical signal moves  unidirectionally along the neuron?  So what leads to unidirectionality?  Who's been to a sporting event lately?  OK, good.  You guys know the wave?  So we're going to do the wave.  Once you to stand up, you're going to be tired,  and you're going to have to sit down for a while.  I'm going to be a ligand--  I'm a ligand-gated sodium channel,  so I'm going to start things off, OK?  You ready?  All right, here we go.  OK, that's basically an action potential.  So the way that this was unidirectional  is once you stood up and did the wave, you then sat down,  and you stopped doing anything.  And so these voltage-gated sodium channels  have a similar property.  If we look at the next step in this,  the sodium channel is opened by depolarization.  And you see there's this ball of chain segment of the protein.  You see that yellow ball?  Once the sodium channel opens, after about a millisecond,  that ball sticks in the channel pore and blocks it, OK?  So these sodium channels open to let in sodium ions,  but then they're immediately inactivated  after about a millisecond, OK?  And so that enables unidirectionality.  So this is what I'll call voltage-gated sodium channel  inactivation.  And how this promotes a traveling  wave of depolarization is that if we consider an action  potential moving along this axon from left to right  and if the sodium channels in the green zone  are currently open, it came from the left,  which means that all the sodium channels  to the left of this green zone are going to be inactivated.  So because they're inactivated here,  there won't be further depolarization  going to the left, but depolarization  will have to move to the right.  And you basically get this traveling wave.  And it goes one direction, because if it  came from somewhere, which it always does, then where it just  was coming from, all those sodium  channels, the voltage-gated sodium channels  are going to be closed.  So this allows it to move in a single direction  along the neuron.  Also, once the action potential gets to the end of the neuron,  it doesn't reflect back the other way in the neuron.  This can only go one direction.  So this provides unidirectionality.  So it's this inactive or refractory period  of the voltage-gated sodium channel  which prevents the action potential  from moving backwards.  Now, if you look at these action potentials in the cell,  you see that they happen, but you don't just  depolarize and stay depolarized.  The cell body depolarizes and then repolarizes very rapidly.  So there's an oscillation.  So there has to be some way to terminate the action potential.  So there's a termination or repolarization of the cell.  So there has to be a way for this nerve cell  to rapidly restore membrane potential.  And I want you to think for just a couple of seconds  about what type of channel might you open  to re-establish this polarity.  What ion do you need to flow from where to where in order  to get a net negative charge on the inside?  Udo?  AUDIENCE: You need to move the sodium ions  from the inside to the outside.  ADAM MARTIN: OK, you could pump the sodium ions out,  and that's totally accurate.  So that's going to require moving sodium ions  up a concentration gradient, which is going to take energy  and is going to be slow.  So is there another option we could take advantage of here  to repolarize?  Rachel?  AUDIENCE: Move the potassium ions.  ADAM MARTIN: So Rachel has suggested  to moving the potassium ions to the outside, which  is how this is done.  So remember, potassium is high in the cytoplasmic,  low on the exoplasm.  And therefore, if you have a voltage-gated potassium  channel, that's going to cause a rush of positive ions out  of the cell.  And that will be able to restore the net negative potential  on the inside of the cell.  So this termination or repolarization  is the result of the opening of voltage gated, in this case,  not sodium channels, but potassium channels.  When do you think these have to open relative  to the sodium channel?  Should they open right with the sodium channel?  Carmen's shaking her head no.  Do you want to explain your logic?  AUDIENCE: Well, I mean, they both carry the same charge,  so they wind up getting out at the same time [INAUDIBLE]..  ADAM MARTIN: Exactly.  So what Carmen said is if they open simultaneously,  you have sodium flowing in.  You have potassium flowing out.  And that's not going to necessarily change the charge.  So when would these have to open relative to sodium channels?  Yeah, Carmen?  AUDIENCE: When it reaches that potential [INAUDIBLE]..  ADAM MARTIN: So after it's depolarized, yeah.  So this has to be delayed relative to the sodium  channels, OK?  So this has to be delayed relative  to the voltage-gated sodium channels.  Because if you're thinking about this traveling  wave of depolarization, the depolarization  is going to be high where the sodium channels are only  entering.  And then following that, you would  have potassium ions getting pumped out  and basically repolarizing the cell.  Everyone see how you sort of get depolarization  with sodium rushing in, and then after that, you  repolarize with the potassium getting pumped out, right?  So here, you have a spike, and you complete the cycle.  It can even get hyperpolarized, where it gets even more  negative than it normally does.  And then it eventually gets back to this resting potential  of around negative 60 or negative 70 millivolts.  OK, so this has to happen fast.  And I want to tell you about one process or property of neurons  and another helpful cell that enables  this to go extremely fast.  And that is that there are these glial cells in your body  and your brain that wrap around the axons  of the neurons and basically function like electrical tape  for neurons, OK?  So they are these--  there's electrical insulation around the axons  of these neurons.  And this is provided by another specialized cell  type called a glial cell.  So this is by a glial cell.  And here are two examples of glial cells.  There are oligodendrocytes-- and you  can see how the cell is extending processes  that wrap around the axons of these two neurons.  Here's a Schwann cell over here, which  again, wraps around the axon.  And these cells basically form what's called a myelin sheath.  So they form a myelin sheath around the axons.  And that insulates the plasma membrane of the axon  such that--  so here is an axon.  You have glial cells that are wrapped around,  and it sort of forms like beads on a string.  And so there are these gaps between the myelin sheath  that are known as the nodes of Ranvier.  So there are these nodes of Ranvier, which  are gaps in the myelin sheath.  And these nodes perform an important function  for the neuron, because where the axon is wrapped,  the membrane is electrically insulated.  And so the sodium ions--  or the sodium channels and potassium channels,  the voltage gated ones, localize to these nodes.  And when the action potential is traveling along the axon,  because these regions where the myelin sheath is  are electrically insulated, the axon potential  doesn't just move continuously, but jumps from node  to node, such that you are just opening the sodium  channels at these nodes.  And that allows the action potential  to travel about 100-fold faster along the axon.  And that's what allows your neurons  to transmit these electrical signals  from the base of your spine to your foot so rapidly.  So you get an increase in speed because the action potential  is jumping from node to node.  And one important reason to bring this up  is because there is an important human disease that  affects the electrical insulation in the myelin sheath  here, and that's multiple sclerosis.  So we're going to unpack multiple sclerosis in a couple  lectures.  This is an autoimmune disorder.  And so we're going to talk about immunity later in the semester,  and we'll talk about how that happens.  But for now, I just want to point out  that multiple sclerosis happens when the immune system attacks  this myelin sheath.  So in multiple sclerosis, the myelin sheath is damaged.  And if you damage this electrical insulation,  you greatly slow down these action potentials,  and that has a significant impact  on nerve impulses in the brain and throughout the entire body.  And that's why multiple sclerosis  is such a devastating disease.  All right, I'm going to start moving now  to consider more than one neuron.  So until now, we've just talked about how  an electrical signal is sent along the length of one cell.  And now we're going to start thinking about multiple neurons  and how they connect and how neurons integrate information  from multiple other neurons to decide whether or not  to send an action potential.  And so if we consider this connection right here,  there's a synapse right here.  Here's a cell that's sending information  and a cell that is receiving that information.  When we're considering a synapse--  so if we consider a synapse, there's  a cell that is sending the signal, which  is called the presynapse.  This is the sender cell.  And there's a postsynaptic cell.  But you can have more than one neuron  sending a signal to a neuron at a given time, right?  So here, you have one neuron that's  sending a signal at this synapse,  but you might have another neuron sending a signal  to a synapse on this part of the cell.  And you could have another signal coming in here.  And so this neuron will then have  to decide whether or not to fire an action  potential down its axon.  And the way that the neuron decides this  is to integrate the signals.  So there's a signal integration process.  And what's important for signal integration in a neuron is  whether or not the cell body--  whether the voltage increases above a certain threshold  potential.  So if the cell body doesn't increase--  if the voltage doesn't increase above this potential,  there will be no action potential fired.  But if the voltage increases above the threshold potential,  then it fires the action potential  and signals to a downstream neuron  or muscle or another cell.  So here, it is the threshold potential in the cell body  that determines whether or not an action potential is  sent down the axon.  And there are different types of signals  that nerve cells can send.  So there are different types of signals.  Signals can be excitatory, meaning it will  tend to depolarize the neuron.  So there are excitatory signals, which result in depolarization.  For example, with serotonin, that  opens the sodium channel, and that results in depolarization,  so that's an excitatory signal.  But there are other types of signals  that bind to different types of receptors that are inhibitory.  What might be a type of receptor that  would inhibit this process of sending an action potential?  What might an inhibitory receptor  be to lower the chance that this action potential will be fired?  What if I told you it's an ion channel?  What ion would you expect it might pass?  Udo?  AUDIENCE: Potassium.  ADAM MARTIN: Potassium.  Udo is exactly right, right?  If it passes potassium, then it's  going to make the inside more negative.  And that's what's known as hyperpolarization.  So receptors that result in hyperpolarization  would have an inhibitory effect on this process.  And remember, if you're hyperpolarizing,  then you could cause this to actually go down and get  even farther away from this threshold potential, right?  And if you have an activating signal  and an inhibitory signal, they might cancel out,  because one will depolarize and the other will hyperpolarize.  So it's in this way a neuron is able to integrate signals  coming from different neurons.  And that influences whether or not  it will send the signal to a downstream cell.  OK, so now we're focusing on what  is the communication between one neuron and another.  And this revolves around this thing  that's called the synapse, which is basically  the gap between the axon terminal of one neuron  and the dendrites of a postsynaptic neuron.  And so the way that multiple neurons communicate  with each other are through a type of signal  known as a neurotransmitter.  And this is what initiates the signal.  So there's a signal initiation process at the synapse.  Initiation.  And this involves the presynaptic neuron  secreting a neurotransmitter.  So the signal, in this case, signals between neurons  are called neurotransmitters.  And as you see on the slide, these  are examples of neurotransmitters.  They're often derived from amino acids,  and so they're small molecules.  They're not the proteins that you often  see with receptor tyrosine kinase ligands.  This is a different class of signal.  So one example is serotonin.  And if you look up at those, we'll find serotonin here.  There it is.  Here, you can see it's a derivative of tryptophan.  So it's a small molecule, and it's  able to bind to a receptor on the postsynaptic cell  and induce depolarization.  And so neurons are-- the way that they communicate  is-- neurons are a case of where luck favors the prepared.  Neurons are totally prepared to send signals to each other.  They have everything ready to go when they get word  from upstream, and they're ready to send signals  to the next cell.  And that's because if we look at the synapse  prior to an action potential, everything is ready to go.  The cell has neurotransmitter, and it's  packaged in these vesicles, and it's tethered to the plasma  membrane, ready to be released.  So prior to the action potential,  there are vesicles filled with neurotransmitter that are  docked at the plasma membrane.  I abbreviate plasma membrane PM, just so I  don't have to write it out, OK?  So these contain neurotransmitter, right?  But you see in this docked vesicle,  the neurotransmitter is in red, and it  can't get out if that vesicle does not  fuse with the plasma membrane.  So these contain neurotransmitter.  But at this point, the vesicles haven't fused.  But the vesicle's not fused.  When should they fuse?  In this system of neuron signaling to each other,  when should the vesicle fuse with the plasma membrane?  What should trigger the fusion process?  Yes, Miles?  AUDIENCE: So after [INAUDIBLE] axon  when it's time for the [INAUDIBLE]  that's when the vesicles fuse.  ADAM MARTIN: Yeah, so Miles is exactly right.  If we consider my diagram here, there's  an action potential traveling along this axon.  When it gets to the axon terminus,  that should be the signal for these vesicles  to fuse to the plasma membrane and to release  neurotransmitter.  So it's the arrival of the action potential, right?  So remember, in this case, serotonin  is going to be in blue.  If serotonin is inside my vesicle here,  it's going to need to exocytose.  And now the serotonin is going to be outside the cell,  ready to bind to the receptor.  All right, so as Miles pointed out,  you have an action potential.  The fusion should be triggered by the action potential.  In order to fuse, there needs to be  some signal inside the cytoplasm to tell the vesicles to fuse.  That signal is increased calcium ion concentration.  And then when calcium concentration  increases in the cytoplasm, that triggers  the fusion of these vesicles.  And when you get fusion, that's exocytosis,  and the serotonin is now on the outside of the cell,  where it can travel across the synaptic cleft and bind  to a receptor on the postsynaptic neuron.  So this fusion is when neurotransmitter is released.  Neurotransmitter is released here.  And the way that this increasing calcium has to happen,  when the action potential arrives at the axon terminus.  So when it arrives in the axon terminus,  there's depolarization of that part of the cell.  And so there's a special type of protein  called a voltage-gated calcium channel.  All these channels are very selective for different ions.  So a voltage-gated sodium channel  isn't letting in all of the ions outside the cell.  It's selective to sodium.  And this case, this voltage-gated calcium channel  is just going to let in calcium.  And then there's a mechanism that links calcium entry  to vesicle fusion.  And that's going to be shown here.  What you see on this docked synaptic vesicle  is this calcium-binding protein called synaptotagmin  that's present on the vesicle.  And so when calcium goes into the cytoplasm,  that protein binds to calcium, and it activates the fusion  machinery such that the plasma membrane of the vesicle fuses--  or the membrane of the vesicle fuses with the plasma membrane  of the cell, thus releasing the neurotransmitter  into the synaptic cleft.  So this is what starts the signal.  Now, you probably know that these neurons are not active  or on all the time.  So something has to terminate the signal, usually  quite rapidly.  So now I want to talk about that.  So like all signaling pathways, signaling  is useless if you can just turn it on.  You have to be able to toggle it on and off in order  for biological systems to function properly, right?  And that's the case with neurons.  If you just turn on a neuron and you  don't have a way to turn it back off again,  then that's pretty useless.  And so we have to have a way to turn off the signal.  And if we consider the synapse, this  is the presynaptic neuron here.  I'm going to draw a postsynaptic neuron here.  And neurotransmitter is released by the presynaptic neuron  to the postsynaptic neuron here.  Neurotransmitter is released into the synaptic cleft.  So the sort of extracellular region  between these two neurons is called the synaptic cleft.  So now the cell just dumped a whole boatload  of neurotransmitter into the synaptic cleft, right?  How is it going to turn this off?  What does it have to do?  Yeah, Stephen?  AUDIENCE: It could absorb the--  take back in the [INAUDIBLE].  ADAM MARTIN: Stephen's exactly right.  What Stephen suggested is, is there  a way for the presynaptic neuron to reabsorb  this neurotransmitter and, thus, recycle it?  So it could either reabsorb it or degrade  the neurotransmitter.  Different process for different neurotransmitters.  For serotonin, there are channels  that are present in the plasma membrane,  and these mediate reuptake of the serotonin.  So you have channels that are basically--  after the neurotransmitter is released,  it sucks the neurotransmitter back into the presynaptic cell  such that it can then reuse the neurotransmitter later on.  And so this process of reuptake highlights a very important  process that's been utilized by drug companies  to create antidepressants.  So antidepressants like Prozac and Zoloft  affect this reuptake process.  And what that does is it keeps the neurotransmitter  in the synaptic cleft for longer, such  that it enhances the signaling.  And so the idea behind these drugs  is that if you are suffering depression  from a lack of serotonin, then you  can rescue that by preventing the rapid reuptake  of the neurotransmitter into the cell  after the synapse is stimulated and the neurotransmitter  is released.  And so Prozac, Zoloft, these are a class  of drugs that are known as selective serotonin reuptake  inhibitors.  It's kind of a mouthful.  This is abbreviated SSRIs.  But the way they function is to leave the neurotransmitter  in the synaptic cleft for longer so  that you enhance signaling, even if you  have low levels of the neurotransmitter to begin with.  I also want to point out that if we look at this diagram here,  the synaptic vesicle fuses, and then this  releases the neurotransmitter.  But all the machinery on this vesicle  is recycled by endocytosis such that it can be reused again,  OK?  So cells are really good at recycling stuff.  If this is sort of the membrane, you endocytose and then  you can use it again later on, OK?  And so there's recycling not only of the neurotransmitter,  but also all of the machinery on the synaptic vesicles  that are responsible for the fusion event.  All right, now I want to end by just telling you  how this experiment works, where we're  able to activate specific neurons in a brain  and that leads to the animal sort of waking up.  So in a normal neuron--  so this is the last part, optogenetics.  And I'm going to go through this very fast.  But normally, you need a neurotransmitter  to induce depolarization.  But what optogenetics is, is an approach  to control the activity of a cell with light, OK?  So in this case, we're going to have  light inducing depolarization.  And the way this is done is there's a protein discovered  from photosynthetic algae that's responsive to light,  and it is a sodium channel.  And this protein is called channelrhodopsin, specifically  ChR2.  And this is a light-sensitive protein where light  induces sodium channel opening.  So that's going to depolarize the cell.  And what you can do is if you have a gene that you know  is specifically expressed in a certain type of neuron,  you can take the promoter and enhancer region of that gene  and hook it up to this single component, channelrhodopsin,  that open reading frame, using recombinant DNA technology.  And if that's expressed specifically in the neurons  that you're trying to test, you can then  shine a light into the brain of the organism and activate,  specifically, this type of neuron.  And that allows you to test the function of the neuron  in the behavior of an organism.  So, in this case, this mouse, the light  is shined into its brain, and they're  testing a specific type of neuron  that is involved in arousal of the mouse, and it wakes up.  Oh, it's not playing.  So here, this is the brain activity on the top,  and the muscle activity on the bottom.  So you're going to see light.  There's the light.  You see it?  Light going into the brain.  They induce light at that frequency for a while.  And then they're going to wait and see  when the mouse wakes up.  And it's going to wake up right now.  There it goes.  It woke up.  You see now its muscle activity is going, OK?  So you can test the function of specific nerve cells  using this approach, and it's because you  have a light-sensitive sodium channel.  So I'm done for today.  Have a great weekend.  I will see you on Monday. 