 The following content is provided under a Creative  Commons license.  Your support will help MIT OpenCourseWare  continue to offer high quality educational resources for free.  To make a donation or view additional materials  from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT OpenCourseWare  at ocw.mit.edu.  PROFESSOR: I wanted to use this final time--  hour we have together to summarize a few of what I take  to be the central themes of course, the organizing  ideas that, at least have seemed to me,  to structure our argument and our progress  through these, through this almost 100 years of movies.  The first idea, one that we've come back to, I think,  again and again, has to do with what  we might call film in its anthropological or sociological  aspect.  Film as a cultural form, as an expression of a culture,  as something that grows out of a culture,  that expresses the values and prejudices and well  weirdness of a culture.  From this angle, questions of aesthetic value,  questions of artistic excellence,  are irrelevant in some sense.  From this angle, we're thinking about film  simply as a central expression, as a central habit our culture.  Itself and we might recognize that in the 20th century, where  film was the dominant narrative form,  the film performed functions in the 20th century  that earlier forms of storytelling, of narrative end  drama, had played in earlier cultures.  And one of my deep desires in the course,  one of my implicit ambitions all the way through,  was to encourage you to think about movies in this way,  as an expression of the values and assumptions  on the 20th century cultures, which might be in earlier times  have been expressed in other media.  And it was important for me to have  you recognize that our 20th and 21st century, although it's  somewhat different in the 21st century,  because films are-- film is undergoing  such a profound transformation in the digital age.  Nonetheless, in the 20th and 21st century,  audio, visual narrative is a dominant experience  for virtually everyone in the world.  In earlier societies, we didn't have this option,  but it didn't mean that the functions played by the movies  weren't played by earlier forms.  So that's been one of the deep assumptions, one  of the recurring principles to which I've  recurred through the course.  And another aspect of this idea, something I've come back to,  I think several times, has been the relationship  between storytelling and culture.  And drawing especially on certain anthropological and  historical sources, I've tried to suggest to you  that one way of understanding culture  itself, is to understand culture through its stories,  is to understand that the stories a culture tells  reveal the culture in basic ways.  Not necessarily reveal the culture at its best,  although sometimes they may do so,  but they reveal the culture in powerful and central ways.  And some of our work in this course,  as I hope you recognize, has been attempt in some ways  to recover what might be called the cultural,  or the anthropological, or the sociological assumptions  and beliefs that are embedded in our movies.  One of the most important aspects  of this principle of storytelling as intimately  connected to the progress of culture  has to do with an idea I suggested early  in the term, the idea that culture itself-- and this  is what I think, one of the great insights of 20th century  cultural history, cultural analysis--  is the recognition the culture itself is a completely  unfinished thing, that it's never a single fixed item.  That culture itself is, society itself is always  in the process of evolving and changing.  That it's idea of itself is always in flux.  This is an immensely productive way  of understanding what society is, because what it allows  us to do is recognize that the various expressive and other--  especially the expressive forms of a culture,  play a central role in what we might call  this ongoing attempt of a society to define  and renew itself according to various values and assumptions,  and historical inheritances.  But also that the culture uses these stories  as a way to react to disturbances and challenges  to the social fabric.  And remember, borrowing on the great English cultural  historian Raymond Williams, I suggested in an earlier course,  in earlier class, that one of the ways  to think about this process is to imagine  culture itself as consisting of sort  of three strands or voices.  An emerging voice, which represents  new ideas, the future, right?  Emergent voices.  Dominant or central voices, where  the central values of a society are embedded and articulated.  And on the other side, what might  be quote traditional or vestigial voices.  The voices or energies that are losing force, losing power,  as society changes, that belong to a past,  but are still part of the mix.  And once we understand that culture  is this constant sort of our ongoing, mixed conversation  amongst traditional, dominant, and emerging voices,  we begin to understand much more about the complexity of how  a culture proceeds.  And of course, what this also does,  once we make the link between the stories a culture tells  and the cultures' idea of itself,  we can recognize that this same process can  work for understanding stories.  It's immensely liberating, immensely  illuminating, to recognize that of course films,  like other forms of narrative, are going  to do contain elements that are not completely coherent, not  completely in agreement.  That they actually may sustain contradictions.  That films, like other forms of narrative,  may very well articulate both emergent  and traditional voices, and those two voices  may be in conflict, or at least not in perfect coherence  in a particular text.  So, one of the advantages of this perspective  is to allow us to recognize something  of the complexity, even the dynamic and potentially partly  contradictory elements that we may find in particular films.  So the idea that culture is always unfinished, never  a fixed or finished thing, and that the stories a culture  tells are a part of this ongoing conversation, this dynamic,  always unfinished conversation about the value he was  and assumptions the society lives by.  I suggested a number of times that one way  to think about the central or the dominant narrative  forms in particular cultures, film in the 20th century,  the novel in the 18th and 19th century in certain European  and in American society, the public theater of Shakespeare's  day, the oral formulaic narrative  in the ancient world of Homer.  And what I've suggested is that these narrative forms might  be labeled, can usefully be labeled as consensus forms,  because they understand themselves to occupy  a central space in the society.  That they recognize, not necessarily  that they're expressing a true consensus,  no society has a perfect consensus,  but that what they recognize is that they're  expressing what is the imagined, or the accepted,  or the presumed consensus of the culture.  That consensus of values may not be bought into by everyone,  certainly won't be.  Nonetheless, even the people who don't accept the consensus  values recognize what the dominant values of the culture  are, and recognize those sites, like the movies  in the 20th century, that are the carriers of what  we might call that official or consensus meaning.  And one of things I tried to suggest  to you in the course of our discussions  is the way in which, in the 20th century form  of film, the central role that genre forms  play in this process.  And can you see why that would be true?  One reason is that there's an implicit principle  of repetition within variation in genre forms,  because they're so familiar.  Different as a late Western and an early Western might be,  they're still Westerns and they share a great deal.  They share certain fundamental qualities  that every viewer recognizes.  The more literate the viewer or the reader  is in the conventions of a particular genre,  the richer the uses of that genre  become, especially as the genre elaborates itself over time.  And one of the things I've tried to show you by talking,  especially about the Western in American society,  was to suggest that we can actually  understand some of these genre forms  as in some sense mirroring the debate a society  may very well be having about its own nature.  And that the way the Western changes over time  in the history of film is a kind of distillation this process,  whereby the stories of a culture help the story,  help the culture to accommodate itself to changes,  help the help of culture figure out how  its past and its present can be brought  into some kind of relation, help but help the society  get used to change and dynamic challenges to its coherence.  One implication of the kind of argument  I've been making about consensus narrative,  as I've suggested a number of times,  is that a consensus narrative always--  what I'm calling consensus narrative.  We might use a simpler and less aggressive term,  we might say various forms of popular culture  share the same qualities with the particular form  of popular culture I'm calling consensus narrative.  And remember, one of the exciting things  about this concept is that it shifts from culture  to culture, or from era to era.  The consensus narrative system of one society  won't be the same as that of another society,  but the systems will share certain--  in one case it might be the novel, in another case  it might be the film, but both system will--  both of these forms, when there are  consensus system, consensus forms,  will share certain qualities.  And I've suggested that the central qualities they share  are that they are always in some deep way conservative, right?  They're both morally conservative,  or conservative in terms of content,  because they're trying to reach the whole of the society  and they have to be careful about that,  they can't be as advanced or as radical  as the most radical, or avant garde parts of the culture,  because certain elements of the culture  would be alienated by it, and it's  the cultural work of consensus narrative  to address the center of society.  So they're conservative in content and the moral values.  And there are also conservative artistically.  That is to say, they don't do a lot  of sort of daring and shocking, technical or structural  experiments.  Again, because they want to be, because they  aim to be understood by a large proportion of the population.  They aim to be readable by everyone.  And that brings us to do a second item that's  an aspect of, always a fundamental aspect of consensus  narrative, they're accessible.  That they are written or created in a language  according to archetypes, or stereotypes, or shared tropes  and conventions that are accessible,  readable to the whole of the society.  And a final feature that these texts always have  is that they are collaborative.  And I've suggested earlier in the course  that one way to think about how collaborative the movies are  is to recognize in every movie is itself a collaboration.  That you can't make a movie-- one person  can never make a movie.  That a movie is always a collaborative form.  But, I mean this idea of collaboration  in a deeper way as well.  Not only is the text, are the text of movies  literally collaboratively created by many, many creators,  but they're collaborative it another way, in a deep way.  Of course the most obvious one is the way  in which you all genre forms collaborate with themselves,  the way they're in a kind of conversation  with all prior instances of the genre.  And what that means is the genre forms are collaborating  with their history, their collaborating with their--  and they're also implicitly collaborating  with the audience's literate knowledge of what  these genre forms are like, how they behave, what  the expectations in them are.  And their collaborative in yet another way, and this aspect  of their collaborative characters  is one that I haven't emphasized too much,  and I want to do it today in our final, in our farewell lecture.  They're collaborative also because these text,  in some deep way, are collaborating  with what we might call the collective wisdom or values  of the culture.  And this is implicit in what I've  been saying about the way these story forms draw  on the histories, and stories, and conventions that are most  widely shared in a culture.  But I want to clarify what I mean  by-- so there's that kind of collaboration, in which they're  constantly borrowing forms, and arguments, and principles,  and symbols from the vast body of shared knowledge  that a culture might have.  But what this might actually lead to-- one thing  this leads to is the recognition that these cultural forms  are not always noble or wonderful,  that they carry prejudices, that they carry racism,  that they carry misogyny, that they're going to embody,  that the study of these texts is not necessarily,  never should be a totally celebratory experience, even  though many of these texts are what valuable, and lasting,  and speak to us in deep and powerful and useful ways.  It's also true that these text carried the lies and prejudices  of the cultures from which they come,  as I've said a number of times in the course.  Perhaps too many times.  But I mentioned again in this last lecture,  because I want to also mention that there's a way in which,  not just the evils and the limitations of a society that  get expressed in the collaborative consensus  forms that emerge from them, but also  sometimes the wisdom of society does too.  In other words, what I want to suggest  to you is that the collaboration has  to do not only with inherited values, and inherited beliefs,  and inherited story forms, they also  have also have to do with the kind of inheritance of wisdom.  And I have a particularly exciting way  of distilling this for you.  There's a passage, one of my favorite passages,  from Shakespeare, from his from his great late play Cymbeline.  From Act four, scene two, in which a group of characters  gather around a body.  They think the body actually comes alive later in the play,  because there's a lot of wonderful magic in the play,  it's a play about redemption and rebirth.  But at this moment in the play, they think this person is dead,  and they single dirge.  It's one of the most-- a dirge, a song, a funeral song, a song  or a poem to be sung or recited at a graveside.  And there's, maybe the greatest of all such dirges  is in English, is in Cymbeline.  And this is the first stanza and the greatest stanza,  fear no more-- right there, people  are standing over corpse.  Fear no more the heat of the sun;  Nor the furious winter's rages, Thou thy worldly task  hath done, Home art gone and taken thy wages.  Very interesting to image, to embrace a metaphor of working,  a working class metaphor.  You're dying, and the metaphor is,  you've taken your last wages, you finished your work.  Home art gone and taken they wages.  And here comes the couplet that I think is most powerful.  Golden lads and girls all must, as chimney sweepers,  come to dust.  Let me say it again so you get the whole stanza,  it's quite beautiful, I think.  Fear no more the heat of the sun;  Nor the furious winters' rages, Thou thy worldly task  hath done, Home art gone and taken thy wages.  Golden lads and girls all must, As chimney sweepers  come to dust.  Now think about those last lines for a minute.  They're very powerful, even if you don't exactly get them.  Golden lads and girls, the implication is high born,  wealthy, golden in their youth, and in their energy  and in their vitality.  No matter how golden, whether in wealth,  or a vitality, even golden lads and girls  end up in the grave like all of us.  And there's, the implication of course,  is there's a kind of constellation in the fact that  it's-- deaths is our shared fate.  It's a consoling, an attempt to console us.  Although the older I get, the less consolation  I find myself taking from this insight.  Nonetheless, it is a great poem, and this stanza  is a particularly remarkable poem  because of one element in it, the phrase, golden lads.  For those of you know-- very few Americans know this,  but some Brits know this.  In Shakespeare's native Warwick shire,  the phrase golden lad referred to something very specific.  It referred to the condition of the common ordinary flower  that we call the dandelion.  And it's a flower that has a gold cup when it's young,  and then when it goes to seed, and you've all  seen them, because they're native to North America as well  as England.  The top of the cap turns into a kind  of rounded series of filaments, a beautiful round cap and when  you-- a lot that children pick them and blow them,  and the seeds blow all over.  One of the reasons that these common weedy flowers are  so common, is that they're so brilliantly designed by nature  to propagate, because the wind blows  their seeds all over the place.  Do you all have an image of this?  So when you're young, the flowers have these golden caps,  and then when they go to seed, they become these,  they have these rounded filaments on the top.  And these rounded filaments, in Shakespeare's day,  were called golden lads when they-- were actually called,  these flowers were called golden lads when they were in bloom,  and they were called chimney sweeps  when they went to seed, because they looked exactly  like a chimney sweepers broom.  Chimney sweepers we take these rounded brooms  and put them up in chimneys to clean them.  So when Shakespeare writes in the end there,  he says, golden lads and girls all must, as chimney sweepers,  come to dust.  He's describing literally the phases of life in a flower.  Why is that wonderful?  Can you see why that's wonderful?  Why that's what art is?  Because of course, what's happened  is that, what Shakespeare did was  create a brilliant metaphor out of something that's  profoundly concrete.  So the phrase golden lad and chimney sweeper  actually refers to the life cycle of a flower.  Well think of how much more consoling,  how profoundly brilliant the lines become,  when actually Shakespeare's metaphor is literally  linked to the passages of nature,  to the progress of nature.  So what I'm calling your attention to  is a brilliant piece of poetry, a piece of poetry that  has a kind of richness and complexity  that almost couldn't be better.  And even when we don't know that about the flower,  we get the meaning of the lines, but think  how the lines come alive once we recognize  that the progress of human life in those couplets  is being explicitly associated with the life  cycle of a natural object of a flower.  Now this is a great act of poetic geniuses, isn't it?  But where does the genius lie?  Where does it come-- Shakespeare is collaborating  with the wisdom of his culture.  It takes Shakespeare to figure it out,  I mean I'm not saying that it is an act of genius  for Shakespeare to realize the metaphoric implications  of this, he did, but the metaphor is embedded in the way  ordinary people named that flower for hundreds  and perhaps thousands of years.  Shakespeare is collaborating there  with the wisdom of his culture, with the shared understanding  of his society, in order to make that brilliant line of poetry.  So we can take that idea that, the notion of golden lads,  as a kind of emblem for the collaborative energies that  are sometimes released when artists collaborate  with the traditions of their culture,  with the traditions of naming, with the traditions  of understanding, that are embedded--  and so therefore the collaboration is a deep one.  It's an intellectual, and an expressive,  and a creative collaboration between the societies  understanding of things, the cultures understanding  of things, and the artists interaction with those.  And that's an aspect of, an even deeper aspect  of what I mean when I say, that consensus narrative,  and that movies are a collaborative art form.  I've also tried to suggest, again and again in the course,  that there are films and many of, most of the films  we've seen in the semester, also deserve the designation art.  And I don't want, I've not really  wanted to turn the term art into a kind of elitist category  from which we must sort of retreat in awe,  and sort of before it.  I want us to think of art in a simpler  and, I think more useful way, as a form  of intelligence and competence.  In other words, when things are done well in a work of art,  when a movie as well made, when a poem is well made,  we admire it and we respect it, and we  don't have to get mystical about the qualities of art  in order to recognize that intelligence and competence are  qualities that we value in other aspects of experience,  as well as an art itself.  What do I mean specifically by intelligence incompetence?  The most profound way of understanding this argument  has to do with what I've spoken about a number of times  in the course, I've sometimes used the phrase organic form  to explain what I meant in this regard.  But essentially the idea has to do with the sense,  with a recognition that a serious artist will  use instruments that further his or her intentions  effectively and fully.  That is to say, that there's a connection  between the formal or stylistic choices that an artist makes,  and the content that is part of the art work.  That is to say that there's a link or a connection  between the formal choices that a writer or a filmmaker  makes and the content intended to be communicated.  And we can think of the term competence  as having to do simply with the idea of technical mastery.  In other words, a competent poet is a master of language,  is a master of metaphor, is a master of grammar.  You can't be a great poet if you have no understanding  of grammar whatever, because you be you'd be throwing away  one of the great technical resources  of the language, which is the complexity that grows out  of a mastery of grammar.  By the same token, you couldn't have a serious filmmaker  who didn't have a deep profound sense of what  it meant to create a visual story, what  it meant to try to embody meaning in audio, visual ways.  You couldn't have a great filmmaker  who is oblivious entirely to the visual nature  of his experience.  The filmmaker would-- any serious filmmaker  has to be always aware of the special qualities  and properties of the medium in which he or she is working.  So if we think or art then, not as a mystical category,  but as an expression of intelligence and mastery,  intelligence and competence, perhaps we've  demystified it a bit, and given us  grounds for actually making judgments  about particular films, and particular passages,  and moments in film.  And let me remind you again, that a second version  of this argument about the relationship, at least  in part about the relationship between art  and what I had sometimes called entertainment,  the greater complexity or richness of art,  can be embodied also, not only in this first principle  of a connection between the stylistic and formal choices  and the content.  But in this second way, in the second category  or second perspective as well, in terms of what  I've called texture or multiplicity.  The multiplicity principles.  Let me just quickly remind you of a couple of examples  we've looked at in the course, just as a way of giving you  some instances from which you can--  from which you can extrapolate your own responses  to other texts.  Do you remember for example the scene  of that, that we looked at fairly closely,  in McCabe and Mrs. Miller, that disturbing ironic shoot out  on the bridge?  In which had me murderous young killer goads a young former  into taking the gun out of his holster,  and shoots him down in cold blood, right?  Let me simply remind you about the way in which,  part of what gave that scene it's power  had to do with the fact that there  was a psychological dimension to it.  The young murderer who was committing the murder  had been frustrated because he tried to show off earlier  and not succeeded.  And that imparted a terrible, horrible irony to the scene,  because you realize that this murder is  completely fortuitous, it's completely accidental.  If that little murderer had succeeded earlier  in shooting the bottle that was floating around  on the frozen pond, he probably would not have challenged,  he definitely would not have challenged this young farmer  to try to get back his mojo and show  the people around him that he knew how to handle a gun.  So what made this-- and of course, and then  that already created a kind of complexity and texture.  But then, when we add in the fact  that this scene itself is one of the central iconic scenes  in all Westerns, two males facing off against each other,  ready to shoot we, come to realize  that the various anti-heroic and ironic ways in which this shoot  out is handled, throws a profoundly  critical and disturbing light on dozens, and perhaps hundreds  of earlier such scenes that have occurred in Westerns.  That the very basis of the Western's embrace of violence,  it's notion that you could achieve regeneration  through violence, is put in question by that scene.  So there's a texture or multiplicity the scene.  It forwards the story, it shows a violent act,  it tells us something about the psychology of the murderer,  but even more than that, it resonates  through the whole history of the Western,  because the shoot out itself has been  shown in such an anti-heroic, such an ironic light.  Texture, multiplicity.  Remember the moment in Cabaret where  the Joel Gray character, the interlocutor, at one point  kneels down while he's talking during the mud wrestling scene,  picks up a piece of mud on his finger,  rubs it on his face like this, and gives himself  with Hitler mustache.  I mean it's a rich comic moment, but is  more than that, especially in the context of,  as the film proceeds.  We understand from that moment that the Nazis  are objects of fun and mockery.  Not that dangerous, it would seem,  at least at that the cabaret feels superior to it.  And of course, when we think about the course of the film,  when we think about how the Nazis moved from the periphery  to the center of the movie, we come  to recognize that that moment, especially in retrospect,  that moment has a particular kind  of ironic original richness, that's partly  a function of the obliviousness that everyone  in the cabaret, and even the Joel Gray character,  despite his apparent cynicism and worldliness  seems to have about-- they're innocent,  they're naive about the power and danger  of the rise of the Nazis.  And let me give you one last example, although there are  many others that we mentioned.  Do you remember the moment in the passage  I showed you from the De Sica movie, Umberto D?  That very brief moment where we see a man get on a tram, a bus,  and sit next to someone on the bus, and the bus moves.  It's a completely wordless sequence,  and there's a character we've never seen in the film  before who sits down next to the protagonist,  no words exchanged.  When our protagonist gets up and gets off the bus,  the camera lingers briefly on the man he left behind,  and we see that man go like this.  And what I suggested to you, again,  I suggested that this was a moment  of richness and complexity, of multiplicity in a way.  Because one implication of that scene  is that the man, this stranger that we'll never meet again,  that we only saw for one brief instant  in the course of the film, might have concealed the story  as deep as rich and as moving as that of our hero  Umberto D., who is now leaving the tram,  and we will shortly be following him.  Again, a moment of complexity or richness  that embodies central meanings, helps  us to see central meanings in the text.  Well I have a final example of this kind  of texture or multiplicity.  It's an example I had hoped to show you  what we talked about Kurosawa last week,  but I didn't quite make enough time in my lecture,  and I want to show it here, as a kind of final homage  to that great director, and as a way of reminding you  of the variety of performances that the great actor Toshiro  Mifune, who plays the rapist in Rashomon, was capable of.  So here is a scene, a very minor scene, actually, from the film,  from the Kurosawa film, Seven Samurai,  which I mentioned last time.  Let me set the context for you, before I show it to you.  It's a very brief scene.  Seven Samurai, which I've sometimes shown in this course,  I actually toyed with the idea of having  to watch both Rashomon and Seven Samurai,  but Seven Samurai is a very long movie,  and I sometimes warn students about it  when I show it in the class.  I decided not to do it, but I hope  all of you over your Christmas break,  soon, will look at Seven Samurai.  It will resonate, especially for you,  since you've just seen an earlier Kurosawa film.  Well, this immensely long film has a wonderful epic amplitude.  And the long first section of the film  involves, essentially, the assembling  of a group of samurai who are going  to go to a village to defend this village of farmers  from the deprivation of bandits.  When the film opens, some farmers  aren't make their way to a great city, trying to find samurai  who will come and defend them.  And the first section of the film  shows this group of samurai slowly coming together,  but only six of them are in the group, because there  was a seventh who tried to join them,  the Toshiro Mifune character, but he  was rejected in the earlier part of the film  that we haven't yet seen.  That we have seen, but when you look at the clip,  you will not seen yet, because he's not really a samurai,  he's is a commoner who was trying  to fake that he was a samurai.  He grew up top knot, he can handle a sword,  but they could tell in various ways,  he didn't know the poetry that samurai  knew, a lot of ways in which they figured out  that the Mifune character really was not a samurai.  So they didn't let them join them.  And in this scene we're going to see,  it's two or two and a half minutes long,  and this is one reason I wanted you  to look at it, because it's so brief,  and its basic function is so simple.  The point of the scene is to get the samurai to the village  where the central aspect, where the central adventure  of the film will take place.  So we could almost think of part one as a kind of prologue,  or at least an introductory preparation,  and the film really isn't going to get going in one sense  until after this transition moment.  So the sequence we're looking at has a very simple narrative  function, it's to get the samurai  from the city to the rural village,  and we see them making this trip.  But as you'll see, the scene has a much greater multiplicity,  a much greater significance than simply this simple narrative  significance of moving the actors to a new location.  Here we go.  And see he's following them in the back there  and they say go away.  [VIDEO PLAYBACK]  [MUSIC PLAYING]  [LAUGHTER]  [WHOOPING]  [WHOOP]  [LAUGHTER]  [SPEAKING JAPANESE]  [LAUGHTER]  [WHOOPING]  [SPEAKING JAPANESE]  [END PLAYBACK]  PROFESSOR: Alright, so a scene of unexpected comedy,  but what else?  Can you see how much is going on there?  If we think about the scene for a moment, we can see,  OK, the first function of the scene  is to get them to the village.  But it's a wonderful example of the multiplicity principle,  it seems to me.  It forwards the story in some simple sense,  but what does it also do?  It defines the samurai in some basic way.  First of all, the legitimate samurai have a sense of humor.  But even more than that, as we're  watching this scene, what do we see, among other things?  A wonderful very brief dramatization of the conflict  between man and nature.  Think of a raw those natural environments  are in that sequence.  And the extent to which we also-- the film  itself is in many ways-- a sub-theme in the film  is the relationship between human beings  and natural forces, this scene implicitly  sets that them up without doing anything fancy  or calling our attention to it.  What else does it do?  It defines the Mifune character really richly and fully.  He's something of a clown, isn't he?  He likes attention, there's something deeply theatrical  about him.  See the way he, he knew the other samurai were watching him  when he caught the-- What else did we learn about him?  He's also unbelievably competent.  He jumps in that freezing water and he catches  a fish with his bare hands.  And one implication of this scene  may very well be that one the things to the Mifune character  is trying to do is show the samurai how competent is.  And you see, he ends up leading them to the village.  And of course, you might guess, do you think he remains  excluded?  No of course not, he ends up joining.  He is the seventh samurai, and becomes the seventh  as the film goes on.  So we, Mifune's nature is defined for us in action  more than in words, we have the theme of nature versus man,  we have the broader definition of the nature of the samurai  group itself, and we get an action that also moves  the story to a new location.  And one reason that I find this example such a powerful one,  is that many people watching this movie never even  remember this scene, because it's hardly-- even though it is  very dramatic scene, isn't it?  The fact is there's so many astonishing, dramatic, visually  memorable scenes in the film, that most viewers who  don't have the advantage of having this scene singled out  for them would never even remember it.  And that's exactly why it's so valuable,  it seems to me, because if it plays a relatively minor role  in the film.  Its role in the film is fairly simple and structural,  but even in that simple two and a half minute sequence,  a great deal is going on.  It's a wonderful instance, it seems  to me, of what we mean by texture or multiplicity.  If you are aware of this principle when  you look at other forms of art, not just films,  I think you'll find your sense of what  is going on in a particular text,  or a particular expressive form, will be immensely enlarged.  And I hope you apply these ideas not just to movies  in the future, but to other but to other forms  of expressive experience as well.  I also, at the end of this course,  as at the end of every semester, am  afflicted by a sense of gratitude  that I can't always fully express to my students.  I've been doing this for a long time,  I was thinking as the class opened this afternoon looking  out at your faces, I realized that one  of the most amazing things about being a professor  is that your basic clients stay young, and they keep you young,  they keep you young, even though they also, in some ways  make you more and more conscious of the gap between you  and your students in some respects.  I have no doubt that part of what  has made my career a satisfying one,  and certainly what has made me a much, much better teacher  than I might otherwise have been,  has been the enthusiasm and welcoming interest  that I've felt from virtually every student I've ever taught.  And that's especially true in this course,  and it's been especially true in the semester.  So I want to end then, by saying thank you.  In a way, symbolically, I'd like to say thank you  to the students I've been teaching  for more than 35 years at MIT, for whom you are stand ins.  But most of all, I want to thank you.  You make me, teaching makes me, feel serious.  Being able to introduce students to these astonishing works  of art has always seemed to me to be a privilege for which I  was unable to express, fully, my gratitude .  So thank you very much.  Have a wonderful life.  [BLANK AUDIO] 