 The total mechanical energy, E sub mech  is defined as the sum of the kinetic energy  and the potential energy, so the sum  of K plus U, where U is the potential energy function  associated with the conservative force--  with an appropriate choice of zero point.  If there are multiple conservative forces acting  on the system, then U will be the sum  of individual potential energy functions  for each conservative force with an appropriate choice of zero  point for each individual function.  We've also seen that the change in the kinetic energy  plus the change in the potential energy  is equal to the change in the total mechanical energy.  And that's just basically the derivative of the equation  that I wrote above.  And this change in the total mechanical energy  will be 0 for conservative forces.  In addition, we've seen that the change in potential energy  is related to the conservative work done in the system  so that W sub C, the conservative work done,  is equal to the negative of the change in the potential energy.  But we also know that the total work done  includes both conservative and non-conservative forces.  So the total work done is equal to the sum of W sub C,  the conservative work done, plus the non-conservative work done,  and that that total work is equal to the change  in kinetic energy.  Now, I can rewrite that equation by rewriting  the conservative work in terms of the potential energy.  So I could write this, now, as the non-conservative work  minus the change in the potential energy  is equal to the change in the kinetic energy.  This is, again, just a restatement of the work  kinetic energy theorem.  Now, by rearranging this equation,  this means that the non-conservative work is equal  to delta K, the change in kinetic energy,  plus delta U, the change of potential energy.  But that's equal to the change in the total mechanical energy.  So the non-conservative work is equal to the change  in the total mechanical energy.  This is a sufficiently important result  that I'm going to write it by itself in a box.  So the non-conservative work is equal to the change  in the total mechanical energy.  So what we've shown here is that the result  of any non-conservative work on the system  is to change the total mechanical energy  of the system.  Now, if there is no non-conservative work,  if the forces acting on the system are all conservative,  then the total mechanical energy remains unchanged  now that Emech is 0.  And we say to the total mechanical energy is conserved.  Now if there is a non-conservative force,  it turns out that in most cases the work done  by non-conservative force is negative,  resulting in a negative change in  the total mechanical energy-- in other words,  in the removal of total mechanical energy  from the system.  It's lost from the system.  Now we've been talking here only about mechanical energy, which  we've defined as the sum of kinetic energy  and potential energy.  But one can also talk about non mechanical energy.  The most common example of which is loosely referred to as heat.  As an example, in the case of friction,  which is a non-conservative force,  we know that the action of friction generates heat.  What's happening is that the non-conservative work done  by friction is negative and, therefore, is reducing  the mechanical energy, the total mechanical energy,  according to this expression, but where does that energy go?  We said that it's removed from the system-- in terms  of mechanical energy, that's true.  But we can think of it as, at the same time,  causing an increase in the non mechanical energy, or the heat  energy, of the system.  So if one were to keep track of both mechanical and  non-mechanical energy, then it turns out  that the total energy, mechanical and non-mechanical,  the total energy of a system is conserved,  even if non-conservative forces are acting.  However, it's difficult to recover  the non-mechanical energy and change it back  into mechanical energy.  These non-conservative processes are not reversible.  This is a complicated topic, and it's  the province of more advanced courses in thermodynamics  or statistical mechanics, which you may encounter later.  In this course, we will confine our attention  to mechanical energy, the sum of kinetic energy  and potential energy, and will treat non-conservative force  as removing, or adding, mechanical energy  to the system. 