 Up until now, we have been studying the motion  of point-like objects.  In this module, we are going to consider  the motion of extended objects, specifically  objects that are rigid bodies.  By rigid, we mean that the distance  between any two points on the object always stays the same.  In other words, the shape of a rigid body  does not change or deform.  There is a useful relation known as Chasles' theorem that  states that the general arbitrarily  complicated displacement of a rigid body  can be broken up into two parts-- first,  the translational motion of its center of mass,  and second, the pure rotation of the object  about its center of mass.  We already know how to analyze the center  of mass translational motion through our study  of point-like objects.  This week, we will consider the rotational motion  of rigid bodies, once again distinguishing  between kinematics, a geometric description of the motion,  and dynamics, the underlying cause of changes  in the rotational motion.  On a microscopic level, we can think of an extended rigid body  as made up of a very large number  of small point-like pieces all attached together.  For rotation about a fixed axis through the center of mass,  each little piece will move in a circle  about the rotational axis.  The radius of the circle will vary  depending upon where in the object,  that particular piece sits.  However, because all of these small pieces  are moving collectively as part of a single rigid body,  they will all have the same angular velocity and angular  acceleration at any given instant.  This gives us a way to specify the kinematics or geometrical  description of rotational motion using  the vector quantities of angular velocity and angular  acceleration.  We will also consider the dynamics of rotational motion.  We will see that an applied external force  is able to change the rotational motion of a rigid body,  depending upon exactly where on the body the force is applied.  This leads directly to the concept of torque,  a vector quantity that represents  a sort of rotational force.  Finally, we will see that we can link the kinematics  and dynamics of rotational motion  through a rotational equation of motion, analogous to the role  that Newton's second law plays for translational motion.  This relation states that the angular acceleration  is proportional to the applied torque  and also depends upon how the mass of the object  is distributed. 