 We are now considering the motion of a rigid body.  And we'd like to talk about kinetic energy of rotation  and properties of that rigid body.  Let's consider a rigid body, and let's  say that our rigid body is rotating about an axis passing  through a point S.  If we look overhead at our rigid body,  then what we're going to do is introduce a coordinate system.  So this is our overhead view.  And suppose that we have a small element of our rigid body  here, which I'm going to write as delta m j.  And that's a distance r j from the center.  Our rigid body has an angle theta.  And what we'd like to do is describe a coordinate system,  r hat, theta hat, and k hat pointing like that.  Now, with this rigid body that's rotating,  we describe the angular velocity as the rate  that the angle is changing with respect to k hat.  And so we can draw the vector omega,  and this establishes our coordinate system  for our rigid body and a small element of mass, delta m j.  Now, what we'd like to consider is  what does this mass element do?  Imagine that it's over there.  Because every point in the rigid body  has the same angular velocity, this object  is going in a circle with angular velocity omega.  Recall that omega is perpendicular to the plane  of motion.  But the object itself has a velocity,  which I'm going to write v j.  And that velocity vector, v j, is in the tangential direction.  And it's related to the z component of our angular  velocity by the following relationship--  it's how far we are from the center point,  S, times the z component of the angular velocity.  And it's pointing in the tangential direction.  So remember that omega z is equal to d theta dt.  And this describes our coordinate system  for the rigid body.  Now what we'd like to discuss is the kinetic energy.  And the way we're going to consider kinetic energy  is, we're going to sum up the rotational kinetic energy  of every single mass element.  So we begin by writing k j rotational.  And we know that that is just 1/2 times the mass element  times the velocity of that element squared.  Now we can use our relationship for the tangential velocity  element related to the angular velocity.  And we have 1/2 delta m j r j squared times omega z squared.  Now keep in mind that omega z is the same for every single mass  element, but the distance of the mass elements  are all different by r j.  So the total rotational kinetic energy  is the sum over j from 1 to n of, let's  put the 1/2 outside, times delta m j r j squared.  Now again, recall that every element has the same omega z.  So I can write parentheses omega z squared.  And that's our rotational kinetic energy.  So what we want to do now is look at the limit  as our delta m j becomes very small, because we  have a continuous body.  And we'll write a definition, which  is going to be the moment of inertia passing  through this point, S, about the axis passing through S  is equal to the limit as delta m j goes to 0  or n goes to infinity of this sum-- delta m j r j squared,  j goes from 1 to n.  Now because this is a limit for the continuous body,  we'll define it as the integral over the body  of a small mass element dm.  That's a distance r squared.  Now here, what is the meaning of the r?  For our continuous body here, if we call this dm  and we define the distance from S to the body r-- and now  I'm going to just put a little notation in here.  It's the distance from S, the axis we're calculating about,  to where the body is dm.  So I'll write S dm.  This is what we call the moment of inertia  of a continuous body.  Now again, what's very important to realize--  it's a moment about a particular axis.  So this is about an axis passing perpendicular  to the plane of rotation and through S, point S.  So it's an axis that's passing perpendicular  to the plane of rotation passing through the point S.  And this is what we call the moment of inertia of a body.  Now, we'll see that the moment can be expressed in terms  of other physical quantities.  As the course develops, you'll see  two or three more fundamental relations  for moment of inertia.  But what we'd like to do now is summarize our results--  that the kinetic energy of rotation is 1/2 for rotation  about this axis, I'm just to indicate passing through S,  of I s times omega z squared.  Now keep in mind, because omega z is a component,  it can be positive, 0, or negative.  But the square is always a positive definite quantity.  And that's our kinetic energy of rotation.  Let's contrast that with our translational kinetic energy.  And we remember there that was 1/2 times the total mass  of the object times v squared cm,  where we're looking at all of the objects  at the center of mass.  And this is the total mass of the object. 