 Newton's first law tells us about the motion  of isolated bodies.  By an "isolated body," we mean one on which the net force  is 0, one that's isolated from all interactions  to as great a degree as possible.  Newton's first law states that an isolated body  moves in a straight line at constant velocity  and will continue to do so as long as it remains undisturbed.  Note that that constant velocity might be 0.  So for example, a body at rest-- an isolated body at rest  will remain at rest if left undisturbed.  An isolated body moving at constant velocity  will continue to move at a constant velocity  as long as it remains undisturbed.  It turns out that it's always possible to define  a coordinate system in which an isolated body moves  at constant velocity, perhaps 0.  Such a coordinate system is called an "inertial coordinate  system."  So another way of stating Newton's first law  is that inertial coordinate systems exist.  Now, it's worth pointing out that not  all useful coordinate systems are inertial.  The ones that aren't we call "non-inertial coordinate  systems."  As an example, imagine that I am standing in an elevator that's  accelerating upward.  If we defined a coordinate system that  moves with the elevator, that coordinate system  is accelerated with respect to an observer who is at rest.  In that accelerated coordinate system,  an isolated body would not move at a constant velocity.  So there are applications where using  non-inertial coordinate systems is convenient.  However, in this course, we will concentrate  on inertial coordinate systems in which isolated bodies move  at a constant velocity.  What if the body is not isolated?  If a force acts on a body, then it  will accelerate in proportion to that force.  In particular, for a point like constant mass,  Newton's second law tells us that the vector force  is equal to the mass times the vector acceleration.  So in other words, the acceleration caused by a force  is proportional to that force and the constant  of proportionality is the mass.  And there are two important points  I want to make about Newton's second law.  The first is that forces always involved  real physical interactions.  Something must be acting on the object.  If nothing is acting on the object,  if the object is isolated, then we  know-- from Newton's first law-- that an isolated body never  accelerates in an inertial frame.  It moves at constant velocity.  So the only way to have an object  move with a velocity that's changing--  that is, to have an acceleration--  is to have a force acting on it.  And Newton's second law tells us exactly how that works.  The second point I want to make is  that this statement of Newton's second law, F equals ma,  is actually a special case.  It's for the special case of a constant point like mass.  More generally, Newton's second law is written as the force  is equal to the time derivative of the momentum, p.  Now, we'll talk about momentum later in this course in more  detail, but I'll just tell you that the momentum,  for a point like mass, is defined  as the mass times the velocity.  Now, for a point mass that's constant,  these two equations are exactly identical.  If you take the derivative of m times v where m is a constant,  you just get m times the vector a.  And you get the first equation back.  So it's just a fancier way of writing the same thing.  It doesn't convey any new information.  So why do we talk about this as being the more general form?  It's because this second form of Newton's second law  can be generalized to a system of particles or a system  where mass is flowing and the mass of something is changing.  You can't describe that by F equals ma,  but it's always true that, for a given system, F equals dp/dt.  And we'll see how that works in more complicated mass flow  problems later in the course. 