 We can consider a given coordinate system  as a reference frame within which we can describe  the kinematics of an object.  By "the kinematics," I mean the position, the velocity,  and the acceleration as a function of time,  basically a geometric description of the motion.  Some aspects of these kinematics will look different  in different reference frames and I'd  like to examine that now.  First, I want to define what I mean by an "inertial reference  frame."  An inertial reference frame is one  in which an isolated body, one with no net force acting on it,  moves at constant velocity, where that constant velocity  might be zero.  Another way of saying this is that an inertial reference  frame is one in which Newton's laws of motion apply.  Recall that Newton's first law of motion  states that an isolated object with no forces acting on it  moves at constant velocity.  So let's begin by considering an observer  in a particular reference frame.  We'll call that reference frame S and denote it  by coordinate axes x and y.  And let's consider an object that in that reference frame  is at a position vector small r.  We can then consider a second reference frame, which  I'll call the frame S prime, and I'll  denote that with coordinate axes x prime and y prime.  In my example here, I'm going to assume  that the coordinate axes in frame S prime are parallel to  but displaced away from the coordinate axes in frame  S. More generally, we could have the S prime coordinate axes  rotated with respect to the frame S axes.  That's a complication I'm not going to add now  but conceptually, it's not really different.  For simplicity, we'll stick to parallel axes in this example.  So imagine we have two observers, one  in frame S at the origin and one at the origin of frame S prime,  both looking at the same object.  Observer S will measure a position vector little r.  Observer S prime will measure a position vector little r prime.  The two observers have a relative position vector,  capital R, which is the position of S prime relative  to the origin of frame S.  So what we'd like to see is how are these different position  vectors related.  Well, from the geometry of the diagram,  we can see that the position measured by observer S, which  is just little r, is equal to the position of observer S  prime relative to observer S, which  is capital R, plus the position vector measured  by the observer at S prime, which is little r prime.  I can rewrite that if I'd like to write the position measured  by the observer at S prime in terms of what's  measured by the observer at S. I could just  rearrange this and write that little r  prime is equal to little r minus capital R.  Now let's add a further complication  and assume that the observer S prime is not  just at a different location from the observer of S  but is moving at constant velocity relative to frame S.  So we'll assume that frame S prime is moving  at constant velocity with respect  to frame S at a constant velocity vector V.  So V vector is a constant.  And in that case, my offset of observer  S prime relative to observer S, which is the vector capital R,  is a function of time.  So capital R is a function of time  and it's given by the offset at time 0, which  I will call capital R0, plus the elapsed motion  due to the constant velocity, which is capital V times time.  So since capital R is a function of time, that tells me  that in this equation, little r prime, the position vector  measured by the observer in frame S prime,  is also going to be a function of time,  even if capital-- sorry-- even if little r is a constant.  So notice what that means.  If the object is at rest in frame S,  the object will appear to be moving.  Its position vector will be time-dependent in frame S prime  because capital R, the location of S prime relative to S  is changing.  So this relation tells us how the position vectors in the two  frames are related.  What about the velocities?  Well, to compute how the velocities are related,  we can just take the time derivative of the relation  of the position vectors.  So in this particular case, we have  that the time derivative of the S prime position,  d little r prime dt, is equal to the time  derivative of the position in frame S, which is d little r  dt, minus the time derivative of the offset of S prime relative  to S. So that's minus d capital R dt.  And I can rewrite that in terms of symbols for the velocity.  So I have here the velocity little v prime, which  is the velocity measured by an observer in frame S prime,  and that's equal to the velocity of little v, which  is the velocity measured by frame S,  minus d capital R dt, which we see  is just capital V vector, which is the velocity of S  prime relative to S. So this is how the velocities are related.  And again, notice that if the object is stationary in one  frame-- so if it's 0 in one frame,  it will be nonzero in the other frame.  So in general, you will measure different velocities  in the different frames, even if one of those velocities is 0.  Now, how are the accelerations related?  Well, again, we can just take the time derivative  of the velocities to figure out what  the relationship of the accelerations is.  So differentiating this equation,  I have that d little v prime dt is  equal to d little v dt minus d capital V dt.  But here, something interesting happens because remember,  we said that capital V is a constant vector.  And remember, capital V is the velocity  that frame S prime has relative to frame S.  So since capital V is a constant, that  means that this term goes to 0.  And so we see that the acceleration in frame S prime  is equal to the acceleration in frame a.  So if I have two reference frames, one moving  at a constant velocity relative to the other, in general,  I will measure different positions  and different velocities for an object as  measured by the two frames.  However, the accelerations measured in both frames  will be identical.  Because the accelerations are identical,  we'll see that Newton's laws will look identical  in the two frames.  And we can see that in the following way.  In frame S, we have that the force  is equal to the mass times the acceleration.  In frame S prime, the force F prime  is equal to the mass times a prime.  But a prime is equal to a, as we calculated here.  So we see that the forces in the two frames  are identical, even though the positions and velocities  in general will be different, as measured in the two  frames for the same object.  But the accelerations will be identical  and so the forces will be identical.  So if one of these reference frames  is an inertial frame, one in which  an isolated body moves at constant velocity,  then any other frame moving at constant velocity with respect  to the first frame will also be an inertial frame.  What this means is that you're always  free to transform from one inertial frame to another.  And what that means is that you can always  transform to another frame that is moving  at constant velocity with respect  to an original inertial frame. 