 The following content is provided under a Creative  Commons license.  Your support will help MIT OpenCourseWare  continue to offer high quality educational resources for free.  To make a donation or view additional materials  from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT OpenCourseWare  at ocw.mit.edu.  DAVID THORBURN: This afternoon, by welcoming  our virtual audience, the audience that's  looking at this lecture on MIT'S OpenCourseWare, some of you  attentive viewers may notice what the students here  would not notice-- that seven years have elapsed.  There's no podium-- some of you may have gotten that--  and a much older professor.  I hope that our completion of these lectures seven years  later will not result in a reduced or less energetic  performance.  I'll do my best.  We come now to the end of our first segment  in the course on silent film.  And I thought it would be helpful to use  today's lecture in part to create some perspectives  on both the silent film, the idea of the silent film--  not just the particular films we've  looked at, but more generally the phenomenon of silent film,  the whole phenomenon-- and some perspectives that will also  help us look forward to what will follow,  to the sound films that will follow this week.  I'd like in a certain way to do this  by complicating an idea I've already  suggested to you about the notion  of the film as a cultural form.  What does it actually mean to say  that a film is a cultural form?  What, in a concrete sense, does this phrase signify?  Well, one answer I think I can offer by drawing  on your own experience.  My guess is that all of you have watched older films, films  from 20 or 30 or 40 years ago, and immediately  been struck as soon as you began to watch  the film by certain kinds of differences  that the original filmmakers would have been oblivious to.  And I'm talking about things like the hairdos of people,  the clothing that they wear, the way automobiles look, or even  a world in which there are no automobiles,  the physical environment that is shown.  One of the things that this reminds us of  is that always, even the most surreal  and imaginative and science-fictiony  films, always inevitably in some deep way,  in some essential ways, reflect the society  from which they come.  They may reflect more than that, and they  may be influenced by other factors as well,  but they are expressions of the culture that  gave rise to them in certain really essential ways.  And one of the things this means,  among other significance, one of the most interesting aspects  of this recognition is the fact that films  get richer over time.  They become artifacts of immense anthropological interest,  even if they're terrible films, because they show us  what the world of 50 or 25 or 30 years ago actually looked like  and how people walked and how people combed their hair  and what kind of makeup they wore,  all of the things, many of the things, which  in many respects, the people making the original film  would simply have taken for granted as part of the reality  they were trying to dramatize.  So one way of thinking about film as a cultural form  is to recognize that as films grow older,  they create meaning.  They become more interesting.  They become richer, and a corollary implication  of this idea that films become richer  is that the meaning of any individual artifact,  cultural artifact, especially cultural artifacts as complex  as films, is always in process.  But the meaning is never fully fixed or finished,  that new significance and new meanings emerge  from these texts with the passage of time,  as if the texts themselves undergo  a kind of transformation.  One final point about this, just to sort of tweak  your broader understanding of these kinds of questions--  one of the kinds of transitions that  occurs with particular artifacts is they sometimes move or make  a kind of transition from being recognized  as merely ordinary and uninteresting parts  of the society from which they grow, from which they emerge,  simply ordinary routine aspects of the experience of society.  Later ages may value these routine objects  as profoundly valuable works of art.  And in a certain sense, one could  say that the film in the United States  underwent a transition of that kind,  that at a certain point in the history of our understanding  of movies, American culture began to recognize that movies  were actually works of art, that they deserved comparison  with novels and plays and poems and so forth, probably  an idea that all of you folks take for granted.  Many of members of your generation  admire movie directors more than they do novelists and poets--  a radical mistake it seems to me,  but that's my literary bias showing through.  I certainly admire great directors certainly as much  as I do good novelists.  But the fact is that this is really not the case.  This recognition of the film as an artistic object,  as I've suggested earlier in the course,  is not some fixed or stable identity  that the film has had from the beginning.  It's an identity that the film has garnered,  that has been laid on the film later  as cultural changes have occurred  and as other forms of expression have emerged  that have put the film in a kind of different position  hierarchically from other kinds of imaginative expressions.  And as I've already suggested many times in this course,  we'll come back to this principle, because it's  such a central historical fact about the nature, the content  of American movies especially.  It's the advent of television that  is partly responsible for the transformation,  although it takes some time for the transformation  in American attitudes toward what movies are,  because television became the throwaway item,  the routine item, the thing Americans  experienced every day.  And the consequence of that was to change our understanding  of what the film was.  Now of course, the Europeans had an insight like this long  before the Americans did, and that's  something I'll talk about a bit later today  and also at other times in our course.  So that's one way of thinking about what it means to say  that a film is a cultural form.  It means that it's unstable in the sense  that its meanings are not fixed, and the way  in which a culture categorizes and understands  a particular artifact is also something that's unstable,  that undergoes change over time.  But there are other ways to think  about this problem of film as a cultural formation,  as an expression of society, and I  want to tease out some of those meanings for you as well.  One way to come at this problem is  to think of a kind of tension or even contention  between our recognition that film is a global form-- that  is to say that because the movies are watched  across national boundaries, movies that are made  in the United States can influence movies that are made  in Europe and vice versa.  So in one sense, the film, especially  after film got going within the first 10 years of its life,  it had become an international phenomenon,  and American films were watched in Europe,  and European films influenced American directors, even  at very early stages so that we begin  to get certain kinds of films that certainly appealed  across national boundaries.  And so there is a kind of global dimension  to what film might be.  And there's another way of thinking  about what it means to talk about film  as a global phenomenon, not as a merely national expression.  And that has to do specifically with the way in which  particular directors and films in particular societies  can influence world cinema.  And from the very earliest days of cinema, as I suggested,  this has been a reality.  As David Cook's History of Narrative Film informs you,  and I hope you'll read the assigned chapters  on Russian film closely, because I can only skim  these topics in my lecture.  What you'll discover among other things  is that the great American director, DW Griffith,  had a profound impact on Russian films  and that, in fact, at a certain point  in the history of Russian films, there  was a workshop run by a man named Kuleshov,  who actually took DW Griffith's movies  and disassembled them shot by shot  and studied the editing rhythms in his workshop.  This had a profound impact not only on Russian cinema,  but Griffith's practices had a profound impact  on virtually all filmmakers.  And there's a kind of reverse influence,  because certain Russian directors, Eisenstein  especially, but also Dziga Vertov,  their work had a profound impact on the films  from Western Europe and from the United States.  So it's a two-way process.  It's too simple to say that particular films are only  an expression of French culture or only an expression  of Russian culture or only an expression of American culture.  They are also global phenomena, and they  were global phenomena from almost the earliest stages.  So it's important to recognize this tension or this balance.  There are dimensions of film that reach  across national boundaries.  And as we've already suggested, one  of the explanations for the success of American movies  in the United States was in part a function  of the fact that they did not require language  in nearly the same degree.  They were visual experiences, and an immigrant population  coming into the large cities of the United States  at the turn of the century was one of the primary factors that  helps to explain the phenomenal quick growth of the movies  from a novelty into a profound embedded cultural experience.  So it is a global phenomenon in a certain way  and reaches across national boundaries.  But there's also-- and we need to acknowledge  this side of the equation too-- there's also a profound,  a really deep fundamental sense in which  films, at least until very recently,  are an expression of the individual national cultures  from which they come.  I say until very recently, because some of you  must be aware of the fact that a new kind of film  is being made now by which I mean a film that  seems to appeal across all national boundaries, that  doesn't seem to have a decisive national identity.  At least some films like that.  I think the Bollywood people are making films like this.  Americans are certainly making films like this now.  And sometimes if you think of some of the action  adventure films that will have a cast that  is drawn from different cultures, a sort  of multiethnic and multilingual cast, all of them dubbed  into whatever language the film is being exhibited in,  you'll see an example.  What's begun to emerge now in our 21st century world  is a kind of movie that already conceives of itself  as belonging to a kind of global culture.  So far I'm not sure these movies have as much artistic interest  as one would like, but it's a new phenomenon,  and the globalizing tendencies of digital technology  are certainly encouraging new ways  to think about the origins or the central sources of movies.  But until very recently, it is still the case  that virtually every film made in any society  reflected in deep and fundamental ways  aspects of that society.  And one of the reasons that this is such an important thing  to recognize is it means that, especially  in cultures like the European societies  and those in the United States, the movies are profoundly  illuminating source of cultural and social history.  Even if they had no artistic interest,  they would be worth teaching and studying.  And the fact that some of them are luminous works of art  makes teaching them a particular pleasure, a particular joy,  a real vocation.  So if we talk about films as a national expression, what we're  talking about here is the extent to which  the assumptions about personal relationships  and the assumptions about the way society operates  are going to be grounded in culturally, socially  specific phenomena, socially specific practices.  And we're also talking not just about the content of movies,  but also about the structure of the industries which end up  providing movies to the public.  And part of what I want to at least allude  to today in the lectures and materials  that we're looking at today is to crystallize or concretize  this idea that the variations that  are possible within the broad universe of the cinema so  that, for example, the individual and atomistic system  that developed in the United States  for the production of movies, the capitalist arrangements  that developed in the United States  for the development of movies, are in many ways  radically different from the systems that  were developed in some European societies  or in the Soviet Union.  And there's a particular contrast  with the Soviet Union, which developed movies  in a quite different way and had a quite different notion  about them.  The emergence of the movies coincides  in some degree with the turmoil in the Soviet Union.  The Russian Revolution is 1917.  Movies become a central source of information and propaganda  for the emerging of Soviet culture.  Lenin called movies our greatest art form,  because he understood how important they  were in promulgating certain ideals  and embedding those ideals in the society.  And in fact, there were not in Russia  a series of independent companies that produced films.  There was a top-down arrangement in which the government  controlled filmmaking.  It doesn't mean that they didn't make  remarkable and interesting films,  but it was a different system.  It was a top-down system.  We had central government financing  in which the genres in Soviet films  could be said to have had what we  might call rhetorical sources.  For example, a revolution story is one genre of Russian film,  celebrating the heroic struggle of the people.  There were even sort of genres that we  might call building genres or creating genres,  and they were about creating a farm or building a skyscraper.  And the film was put in the service by the Soviet state,  was put in the service of this emerging society.  It was understood as a system that  would mobilize mass social forces  for the betterment of society.  And these differences in attitudes and in the ways films  are financed and who makes the decisions about what films will  go forward, of course, has a profound impact  on the nature of those movies.  Our demonstration instance today will  be one of the most famous passages from Eisenstein's  Potemkin to demonstrate some of the,  in a much more concrete way, some  of the implications of this difference  between American and Russian film that I'm suggesting.  There also profound differences, and I'll develop this argument  a little more fully to this evening when we shift over  to the great German silent film that we're  going to look at tonight.  There are profound differences between the American and German  systems of moviemaking and attitudes  toward the making of movies.  And I'll elaborate on some of those notions later today  in the evening lecture.  But for the moment then, suffice it  to say that virtually all movies are going to reveal  or are going to embody the values  and assumptions of the culture from which they come,  that that makes them anthropological artifacts  of profound significance and distinguishes French film  from British film from American film  in ways that continue to be illuminating and significant.  But there's certain other contrasts or potential tensions  in this notion of film as a cultural form  that I'd also like to develop or spend  a little bit more time on.  One of them is the notion that there's a profound, even  a fundamental difference, more broadly,  not just between French and American cinema,  but between all forms of European cinema  and the American version.  And this is a principle we'll talk about more this evening,  but I want to allude to it now.  One of the ways to crystallize this  is to remind you of something we've already  talked about briefly in the course, which  is the migration of filmmaking from the east coast  to the west coast in the early days of filmmaking  in the United States, the flight of filmmakers to California.  And we've talked a little bit about why  that's a significant transformation  and a significant move.  But perhaps, the most important aspect of this historical fact,  the migration of the movies to the west coast,  is that what this meant is that the movies in the United States  were able to develop in a culture whose intellectual  and artistic and cultural authorities  were on the east coast, as far away as possible from where  movies were developing.  In other words, the American movie  is much more fundamentally in its emergence a popular form,  a form that has no consciousness of itself as a work of art.  It knows that what it's trying to do  is make money and entertain people,  and the earliest-- very early, there  were some directors like DW Griffith who  recognized the artistic importance of movies.  I don't mean there weren't directors who recognized it.  Chaplin surely thought of himself as making works of art,  especially later in his career.  But the fact is the American movies  begin on the farthest Western verge of the society.  Nothing developed there.  New York is the cultural center.  Boston is a cultural center.  Maybe we could even say some of the great Midwestern cities  have some kind of cultural authority,  but there's nothing on the west coast.  And what that means is that all the writers, all  the dramatists, all the actors, all the theater actors,  all the poets, all the musicians--  they were in the East.  They lived in New York, and there was a kind of freedom  that this imparted to American movies.  And this is a very sharp contrast  with the development of almost all forms of European cinema,  partly because the cultures are literally geographically more  limited, unlike the vast expanse of the United States.  But also because of the much stronger traditions  in these European societies of high culture, the much stronger  respect in these societies for theater and for poetry  and for prose narrative.  In the European societies, and this was especially true  in Germany, but it was true in some degree  in every European society, including the Soviet Union,  there was a sense that the movies  were emerging in the shadow of older art forms whose greatness  and grandeur shadowed, menaced this emerging form.  And in a way, the distinction I'm mentioning,  the difference I'm mentioning, accounts  both for the limitations and for the glories  of both kinds of film, because if the European film  was more static-- and we'll talk much more.  I'll give you some examples of this tonight.  If the European film was more static,  it was less cinematic in a way in its early years,  because it thought of itself as emerging from literature,  from theater, from poetry.  And in fact, some of the important early German  filmmakers especially were people who came from theater,  and they had theatrical notions of what art was.  We'll talk more about this this evening.  So because that was true, the glory  of the early European cinema was its recognition  that it could be artistically powerful,  its sense that it was talking about important subjects.  But of course, the limitations were  that it was often very boring visually, that it was serious,  but not a movie, that it didn't exploit  the properties of the medium nearly as quickly.  It didn't try to explore the unique properties of the medium  nearly as quickly, in part because it was so in thrall  to inherited ideas of artistic value and artistic expression.  This isn't entirely a disadvantage, as I said,  because it also imparted to European filmmakers  a sense of dignity and the importance of their enterprise  that served them well in certain ways  and made them pick ambitious subjects.  And you'll see the outcome, the final outcome,  once the European film was liberated into a greater  cinematic freedom.  And I'll show you an example or two tonight of that.  It became something immensely rich  in part because it had this legacy of high art  behind it and high artistic ambitions.  The United States' story is almost the opposite.  In the United States, there was a kind  of glorious sense of having no responsibility toward older art  forms.  There was something exuberant, experimental, joyous,  unembarrassed about early American films.  They didn't think of themselves as artwork,  so it gave them a kind of freedom.  They were also vulgar as hell.  They were often trivial and silly.  They often had limited artistic ambitions,  but they explored the nature of the medium  in a way that became the legacy of movies and a legacy  that was communicated to other societies as well.  Well, this distinction then between American and European  cinema is something I'll develop a little bit more  fully with examples this evening.  But it's a crucial distinction.  It's a crucial difference, and it tells us a lot  about both forms of filmmaking.  There's one final tension that I want to mention here.  We'll return to it again when we come  to look at Singing in the Rain later  in the course, which dramatizes this subject among others.  There's another kind of tension implicit in what I've already  said, which is the tension between what we might call  popular culture, notions of culture that are enjoyed  by the masses, by everyone as against high culture like opera  and poetry and theater, which only the educated people go to.  And this tension is especially important-- it's  important in many films-- but it's  an especially important tension in American movies.  And one of things that we will come back to in different ways  as we think about these American films is the way in which  very often, American films position themselves  as the antagonist of high culture.  And there are many films that actually  do that, and some of the Marx Brothers  films systematically dismantle the objects of high culture.  There's one Marx Brothers film called A Night  at the Opera, which takes place in an opera,  and the whole set comes crashing down.  The whole place falls apart in the course of the film,  acting out a kind of aggression against the older art form.  And this is a tension also that we will see played out  in some of the films we're going to be looking at a bit  later in the course.  So this notion of Hollywood as the embodiment  of a certain kind of demotic vigor and populist energy  is a helpful way of thinking about  how, especially in the early years,  American film was somewhat different from European film,  and how it also very aggressively was  happy to distinguish itself from established art forms.  I want to take a quick, what will appear to be a digression,  but actually isn't.  I want to talk a bit now about two crucial terms that  will be useful in our discussions of the matters I've  already raised and some other matters that  will come up later in the course,  and then return after clarifying these terms to an example  from Battleship Potemkin, Eisenstein's most famous film,  to demonstrate something of what I mean  by the principles of top-down organization and film  as propaganda that I was talking about earlier,  as well as calling your attention to some  of the artistic innovations that we still  attribute to Sergei Eisenstein.  The two terms I want to discuss are the terms montage and mise  en scene.  They're contrasting elements of what is in all movies.  In a certain way, the term montage and the term mise  en scene describe the most essential features  of what movies are.  Mise en scene, a term drawn from the theater, which  literally, it's a French word.  It literally means what is put or placed  in the scene, what is in the scene.  Mise en scene refers to the single shot,  to what goes on within the single continuous unedited shot  of film, the frame of film, however long it lasts.  And the mise en scene of that shot  is virtually everything inside that frame.  In other words, even how the actors move in the frame  is part of the mise en scene, but especially, the mise  en scene emphasizes what is the environment like,  what's the furniture like, what's  the relation between the foreground, the middle ground,  and the background.  And in mise en scene, the emphasis  is on the composition within the frame,  and sometimes very great directors  will compose their frames with such subtlety  that if you freeze them, they look like paintings.  They're balanced or unbalanced if that's  the artist's intention in particularly  artistic and complex ways.  So we can think of this in some sense  almost as having a kind of painterly equivalent.  What goes on in the scene within?  The other great term, montage, which is also a French term,  comes from the verb the French verb monter, which means  to assemble or to put together.  And a montage means what is put together, what is edited,  what is linked together.  So a montage means the editing of continuous shots  in a sequence.  So the montage of a film is the rhythm of its editing.  So all films have both elements in them,  and in fact, we need to be aware of both of them.  When we look at a film, it's often very helpful  to ask yourself questions about the rhythm of the editing,  to pay attention to how long the shots are held,  to the way the film is edited.  Again, the Eisenstein example we're  going to look at in a minute will give you  some dramatic instances of why manipulating  the editing and the montage can be  so dramatic and so signifying.  So there's a kind of convention that has developed,  and though ti radically simplifies in some ways,  it's a simplification that's immensely instructive.  One way you can talk about directors  is to categorize them as montage directors  or mise en scene directors.  Mise en scene directors-- I'm oversimplifying,  remember, because there's montage in every film.  So a mise en scene director can be  a master of editing too, and a director  that we identify as a montage director certainly  has to know how to manipulate his mise en scene.  So it's not as if one kind of director  doesn't do the other thing, but what it does try to signify,  what it does try to indicate is that directors  we call montage directors are directors whose effects come  in a central way from the way they edit the film,  from the quickness of their editing,  from the way their editing manipulates or controls  meaning in some sense.  And we therefore would think of montage directors-- Eisenstein  is a classic example.  Hitchcock is probably the contemporary example,  near contemporary example, that most of you might have in mind,  in which the editing of the film, the quickness with which  the shots develop, the way the music  is superimposed on the editing rhythm,  to increase your emotional response to the film.  What we would say is that that's what  a montage director embodies.  So if we say that Hitchcock is a montage director, what we mean  is that most of his most profound meanings  come from the way in which he edits his film.  And a contrast would be, let's say, with a director  like the director we're going to see in a few weeks later  in the term, Jean Renoir, a realistic director  who might be called much more fully a mise en scene director,  because he does edit.  His editing rhythms are subtle, but he's  interested in long takes.  Montage directors like short takes,  shots that last only a short time.  In the most dramatic segments of the segment  from Battleship Potemkin that I'm  going to show you this afternoon in a few minutes,  sometimes the edits are so brief that they don't even  last a second and a half.  The average number of shots in the film as a whole,  in Battleship Potemkin as a whole,  the shots last four seconds.  That's not very long.  In a Renoir film, they might last 10, 15 seconds, sometimes  much longer than that.  That's a very long time for a shot to be held,  and if a shot is held that long, it means the camera will move,  action will occur in it, but it'll still be a single shot.  And can you see that if you hold the shot for that time,  and the camera moves like this, what is it encouraging?  It's encouraging you to think about the relation  between characters and the environment.  It's encouraging a kind of realistic response  to what the film is showing you, whereas if you're  looking at a film in which the cuts occur every two seconds,  you don't have time to sort of take  in what's the relation between the actor and the furniture.  You're disoriented, and in fact, Hitchcock often  brought his editing to a point just below the threshold  of disorientation.  When Eisenstein was theorizing about the power of editing--  he was one of the first great film theorists--  he talked about the way in which you could control an audience  physiologically by manipulating montage.  And it's true.  You can, as you will know, and something  that fascist societies are fully aware of and make use of.  So this distinction between montage and mise en scene  is immensely useful, and in some degree,  if you apply the terms generously  and tactfully, you can learn something about every film  you look at by thinking about how these elements work  in the film.  I want to turn now to arguably, certainly  one of the most famous films in the history of cinema  and to a particular fragment from the film  or an extended one, which I think  embodies and will help clarify many of the abstract ideas I've  just been suggesting to you.  Let me say a word about the film.  The film Battleship Potemkin was produced in 1925  at a point when Eisenstein was now at the height of his power  and authority.  And it commemorates a moment in an abortive revolution of 1905  so that by the time Eisenstein came to make the film,  Battleship Potemkin was kind of like a founding story,  or at least, it was about an abortive founding that  would then occur years later.  What it dramatized was a historical fact.  There was a rebellion by the crew of the Battleship Potemkin  against its officers, and it the battleship  sailed into the port of Odessa, and its mutineers  were welcomed by the people in the port of Odessa.  And then the czar, angry that his Navy and his Naval officers  had been mutinied against, sent soldiers to Odessa  to decimate not just the mutineers,  but the population of Odessa.  And so the film, it was understood in a way,  it was a revolutionary document or an attempt  to sort of create a kind of founding myth  for Russian society, because everyone watching the film  would have known that the real revolution occurred only  whatever it was, 12 or 13 years later,  and that this was a kind of rehearsal.  And so the film would have had a kind of patriotic aura  for its audience.  So the passage I'm going to show you is the famous passage.  I think David Cook calls this the most famous montage  sequence in the history of cinema.  It was certainly profoundly influential,  and as we're watching it, I may interrupt  it to say a few things as you're watching,  but I'll try not to do too much interruption.  What I want you to watch for especially is not only--  I will have to make some commentary-- as you're watching  it, among other things, watch for the way  in which the length of the shots or the time between shots  varies.  And as this passage begins to increase  in intensity and terror, the cuts become even briefer.  And then watch also the way in which  certain other strategies of Eisenstein's reinforce  these montage strategies.  For example, where the camera is positioned.  Is it looking up at a character, or is it looking down?  And very different thing.  If you look up, you enlarge, and you mythify.  If you look down, you humiliate and minimize.  Watch how he does that sort of thing.  You'll find it, I think, very illuminating and significant.  The sequence is often seen today,  and rightfully, I suppose, as deeply heavy-handed,  because you're not allowed when you're looking at this film  to have an alternative view of things.  The film doesn't leave you room.  Eisenstein's strategies don't leave you  room for independent judgment.  You're immersed in a spectacle so emotional and so wrenching  that you don't have time to sort of sit back  and think and come to conclusions.  And one could say that this is one  of the great differences between montage directors  and mise en scene directors.  Not an accident most horror movies, all horror movies  really, are a form of montage, because your feelings are  being manipulated.  You're not supposed to be allowed to sit back  and say how ridiculously implausible these events are.  If that happened, it would spoil the film.  We'll come back to these things.  So here is the Odessa step sequence  from the Battleship Potemkin.  [MUSIC PLAYING]  These are the Odessans welcoming the mutineers.  One of the things that Eisenstein was fond of  was a theory of montage that was based on two principles.  One he called typage, typage-- T-Y-P-A-G-E.  And what he meant by typage was the idea that there were  ethnic, very racist in a way, that there were ethnic  and social types that could be recognized visually.  So he would type.  So he felt, if I show you this face,  you'll know he's a working class character.  If I show you a woman with a parasol,  you'll know that she belongs to the upper classes.  And in fact, he's probably right about that.  Here are the czar's forces, come to punish the mutineers  and the city of Odessa.  So the soldiers are on top, and they're forcing people down  the steps, and they are presumably shooting them. .  Kristen, freeze it for a second.  I don't want to distract you by talking while it's running,  so let me interrupt it for a second  and say something else about the way the film works.  One of the things Eisenstein understood was--  and it's actually a brilliant discovery.  He realized that he could create through his strategies,  especially of dramatic editing, he  could create a situation in which  the actual time of the experience that you're watching  was not real time, but was what might be called emotional time.  That is to say what's happening here, it's probably in the film  taking longer than it took in reality,  because in moments of horror, the horror is extended.  And watch how those kinds of rhythms operate in the film.  OK.  Seems like a naive hope.  Freeze it again, Kristen.  One other quick observation.  I hope you recognize how artful this  is, even if you're not moved in the way  the original audiences would have been.  I think contemporary audiences often  feel it's too heavy-handed.  They resist the extent to which the film is manipulating them,  but think back to the earliest days of film.  What an unbelievable, shocking, incredibly exciting experience  it must have been for early film-goers  to have an experience that-- certainly  for the Russian audience, but I think for every audience-- that  was so intense and so emotionally powerful, so full  of fear and violence that can be evoked  by the rhythms of the editing, by the music,  by how close-- I hope you noticed the way  he mixes in closeups in incredibly powerful ways trying  to create certain effects.  Again, you're not given a choice about how to feel about this.  You can descend from it by withdrawing your interest,  but you can't say, oh, I really love those soldiers  who were doing the shooting.  Let's make a case for them.  The film won't allow you to do that, will it?  In that sense, it's manipulating you,  but it's telling us a story about the creation  of a revolutionary society.  Finally, remember, I said that this  is a question about emotional time as against real time.  Think how long this has been going on.  You think that this massacre is over,  but in fact, it's only half over, as you'll see.  There's going to be a moment when  horse-mounted cossacks, horsemen, show up  at the bottom of the steps and get them in a pincher.  Go on.  I don't think this soundtrack is the original soundtrack.  It's very good though.  This is a brilliant moment.  I don't know whether we can attribute this to Eisenstein  or not when suddenly the music stops.  There should be sound now.  Maybe something wrong with our print.  I wanted to wait at least until you saw this,  because some of you may recognize  this moment as something that's been copied  in recent American movies, a kind of allusion  or a reference to this scene.  The moment I wanted you to think about is this baby carriage.  OK.  Thanks, Kristen.  Blood in the eyeglasses-- can you  think of a movie in which you've seen that recently?  Maybe not that recently.  It's actually an ancient film now by your standards.  How about The Godfather?  There's a wonderful scene in The Godfather  where a guy looks up from a massage table,  and he's shot through the eyeglasses.  Very memorable moment.  It's surely an allusion to this movie,  but how about the carriage going down?  There have been several films that actually  recreate that moment, but the one  I'm thinking of-- Who is it?  AUDIENCE: The Untouchables.  DAVID THORBURN: Yes.  From The Untouchables.  Who's the director?  Do you remember?  Yes.  Brian De Palma's film, The Untouchables,  has a moment just like that.  And De Palma, of course, is a kind of historian of movies.  Virtually every scene in a De Palma film  is a reference or an allusion to an earlier film.  And part of the importance of Battleship Potemkin  is that it is still a fruitful and fructifying source  of imagery for contemporary filmmakers.  So let me conclude then by simply reminding you  that, as Cook suggests in his book,  this is the single most influential montage  sequence in cinema history, and that it's  a wonderful instance for us, I think, of the way in which film  in a different kind of culture, in an authoritarian culture,  in a revolutionary culture, full of moral fervor,  would be conceived both as an apparatus,  as an engine of social transformation by a society  that controlled film in a way fundamentally different  from the way in which film developed, let's say,  in the United States.  We will continue these arguments,  and I hope complicate them this evening. 