 MARKUS KLUTE: Welcome back to 8.20, Special Relativity.  In this section, we talk about spacetime diagrams.  They turn out to be very useful tools to describe  events or sequences of events, in particular  when observed by multiple observers.  So what is a spacetime diagram?  Here's an example.  You have an x-coordinate and a t-coordinate  for space and time.  I plotted an event in blue here.  And the world line of events.  A world line is just a sequence of events as they occur.  In this case, something seemed to be  moving with constant velocity.  The world line is just a continuous line of movement.  The velocity of this event is delta  x over delta t, which is 1 over the slope.  Let's have a look here.  So the time axis is defined as those events which  all occur at the same space, x equals 0,  whereas the x-axis is defined as those events which  all occur simultaneously at the same time.  And then you can draw additional lines  into the spacetime diagram where, for example, all times  are equal to 1.  You might want to add a unit.  I omitted this here.  Time might be given in seconds, in days, in hours, in years--  whatever you like-- similar to space in meters or light-years.  So lines here in green of the same time, meaning time  is constant.  All events on that line happen simultaneously,  while in blue are those lines where events happened  at the same location, so x is equal to constant  some specific values.  Here in red, I add one additional caveat, which you're  typically not aware or considering  very much in diagrams is the role of tick marks.  Here in this spacetime diagram, our tick marks  are perpendicular to the axis.  It's also OK or correct here to say that they are parallel  to the second axis, and we'll come back to this point  later on.  An example of a world line is simply  drawing all events which correspond to me, right?  Professor Klute is pacing in his office.  You know, maybe on a line, just the x-coordinate  is plotted here, time passes, and I'm just pacing  the long-changing direction.  Each time, each little segment is constant velocity.  That's the world line of me from some time t  for minus t to term time equals 40.  OK, so now our first concept question.  Let's consider the set of world lines, 1, 2, 3, 4,  and the question is, which of the objects which  correspond to the world line is moving the slowest?  Let's consider this for a second,  and then we look at this.  As the velocity is 1 over the slope,  the object with the steepest slope,  the largest value of the slope, is moving the slowest.  And in this case, it's object number 2.  All right, now we want to actually make them useful.  Yes, they can be used in order to describe certain event  lines, but they're really useful when  you describe events happening for different observer.  So in this activity, I invite you to draw Bob's spacetime  diagram into Alice's, and then as a second step,  draw Alice's spacetime diagram into Bob's.  The situation is very similar to previous ones discussed  in this lecture.  Alice is stationary and Bob moving  in this rocket with a velocity of half the speed of light,  or a gamma factor of 1.2.  All right, try.  Go ahead.  Try to show where is the time axis for Bob  and where is the spatial coordinate for Bob.  OK, so the way to approach this is the following.  We want to use Lorentz transformations in order  to figure out what is the value of Bob's time axis and space  axis for different values of Alice's spacetime diagram.  So we start with drawing Alice's spacetime diagram.  And then if you want to find the x-axis as seen by Bob,  we have to set the time for Bob to equal 0 and then  find the corresponding elements or tick marks on the axis.  So the first point we're going to find  is tB equals 0 and xB equal 1.  So with the Lorentz transformation,  we find that xA 1, so this point corresponds  in Alice's spacetime diagram to xA equal gamma equal 1.2  and tA equal gamma times v over C squared equal 0.6.  So we can make this--  find this first point and plot it in our diagram.  It's right here.  OK, and then we go move around and find the second point  and the third point, and we do the same  for the time axis, where xB is equal to 0 and tB equal 1,  then corresponds to 4.6 in xA 1 and 1.2 in xA 2,  where we find these points here.  I failed to say that the origin of those two spacetime  diagrams [INAUDIBLE].  OK?  So this is already it.  So we found Bob's time axis, where xB is equal to 0,  and Bob's x-axis, where tB is equal to 0.  And I did draw those tick marks parallel to the second axis.  So if I want to now find out the time axis for xB equal 1,  I just have to follow along and draw a parallel in the picture  here.  All right, so the second question  then is, where Alice's axis in Bob's spacetime diagram?  So the procedure is very similar as before.  We draw Alice's axis--  sorry, we draw Bob's axis, and we find Alice's x-axis  by setting tA equals 0, and then we find the number of points  and connect those.  And the time axis is found by setting xA equals 0  and finding them points for various values of time.  And you see here, this looks a little different than before.  I just zoom in here a little bit.  What you find specifically, because relative  the direction of motion changes, the positive values of  x are in positive value--  and negative-- so the positive values of the x-axis  are in the negative time direction,  while the negative values of x are in the positive time  direction, so would be across down here.  So this needs a little bit to get used to,  but you will later see when I draw  in any of the two spacetime diagrams  specific sequence of events, I can immediately read off  how this event is perceived from Bob's and from Alice's  perspective.  And this makes our space diagram very, very useful tools. 