 For a particle that's moving in a circle,  we found that when it's moving at a constant rate of d theta  dt--- and let's recall what we meant by theta of t--  and here's our particle, and we introduced our polar  coordinates r hat and theta hat, then we found that the velocity  was r d theta dt theta hat.  And so let's assume that this quantity is positive,  in which case the velocity is pointing in the positive theta  direction.  And that means that everywhere in the circle,  the velocity is tangential to the circle,  and the magnitude is a constant.  So for this case of uniform circular motion,  we calculated that the acceleration  was equal to minus r d theta dt quantity squared r hat, which  means that at every point, the acceleration vector is pointing  towards the center.  Now we can write that acceleration vector  as a component a of r-- r hat-- where this component is given  by r times d theta dt squared.  It it's always negative, because when you square this quantity,  it's always a positive quantity.  The minus sign, just to remember-- that  means that the acceleration is pointing inward.  Now how can we think about that?  Well, if we look at the velocity vector, what's happening here  is the velocity is not changing magnitude  but changing direction.  And if you compare two points-- and let's  just pick two arbitrary points.  So let's remove this acceleration for a moment  and consider two arbitrary points-- say, a time t1 and t2.  So our velocity vectors are tangent.  The length of these vectors are the same.  And if we move them tail to tail-- [? Vt2-- ?]  and take the difference, delta v, where  delta v is equal to v of t2 minus V of t1,  then we can get an understanding why the acceleration  is pointing inward, because recall  that acceleration by definition is  a limit as delta t goes to 0.  That means as this point approaches  that point of the change in velocity over time.  And so when we look at this limit  as we shrink down our time interval between t2 and t1,  then this vector will point towards the center  of the circle.  And that's why the direction of a  is in the minus r hat direction.  Again, let's just recall that this is the case  for we called uniform circular motion, which  is defined by the condition that d theta dt is a constant. 