 MICHEL DEGRAFF: So why the personal in this course?  Well, at every occasion when the students present  their discussions-- because they often  have a friendly discussion-- or when they write their essays,  I do ask them to include some personal information  in what they write.  In fact, one essay was strictly about that,  about their linguistic biographies.  Because I feel that often students  can be overly ambitious.  Of course, there's this earnestness that we appreciate,  but often they want to go after global changes  like changing the environment or changing  the outcome of elections.  But those are the kind of changes that you often cannot  make, especially not in a one semester course.  But if they are able to understand the way  those global patterns affect their own personal lives  in their own small social groupings,  and if they can actually try to integrate what they learn  in the course to actions in these localized spheres,  then there's a better chance that they can actually  make those changes.  So I like to tell them that the change that they  can make in themselves resolving those issues  are also affecting the wider world.  Because if each person can affect themselves  in their small groups and, in turn,  if everyone in that small group can also affect changes  in their own small groups, then the effect is exponential.  You see?  And I think by the end of the course they do appreciate  being able to share their personal experiences  through essays, through their presentations.  And also they can see the effect that this  has on their own classmates, because some  of their classmates come from very different backgrounds.  So they get to understand how someone, say,  from Guatemala who came to the US  with parents that emigrated without papers  and how that life experience can be inspiring,  because if you can make it to MIT with that kind  of background and then you can actually share it  with others while you are actually succeeding as an MIT  student, that can be life changing for some of us. 