 The following content is provided under a Creative  Commons license.  Your support will help MIT OpenCourseWare  continue to offer high quality educational resources for free.  To make a donation or view additional materials  from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT OpenCourseWare  at ocw.mit.edu.  PROFESSOR: Let's look at storyboard two.  We're going to look in more detail  at carbohydrate catabolism at this point.  We're eventually going to be doing  the pathway of glycolysis, but we have to get there first.  And it depends on what precursors  are available to enter the pathway of glycolysis.  One option that we'll look at a little bit  later is to take in glucose from the blood  by way of a glucose carrier, and then  phosphorylate the glucose using either hexokinase or  glucokinase.  The second option is to take glycogen, the polymeric storage  form of glucose, and degrade it to glucose 1-phosphate, which  will be then converted to glucose 6-phosphate which  will enter the pathway of glycolysis.  We're going to start with this pathway of glycogen breakdown,  or glycogenolysis.  Panel A shows the structure of glycogen,  which consists of glucose monomeric units connected  by a bond between the 1 and 4 carbons  in the alpha configuration.  Chemistry is going to be happening  at the non-reducing end, which is to the left.  The reducing end, which is to the right,  is connected to a scaffolding protein called glycogenin.  We'll come back to glycogenin later in the course.  Let's look next at panel B. The reaction begins  with the proteination of the red oxygen between the terminal two  glucose moieties by a proton on the glycogen phosphorylase  enzyme.  The intermediate product is a resonant stabilized pair  of positively charged species, or cations,  an oxonium ion at the 1 prime oxygen,  and a carbocation at the 1-carbon.  The electrophilic carbocation is attacked  by the negatively charged phosphate residue, which  is non-covalently associated with glycogen phosphorylase  to form glucose 1-phosphate.  Note that the glucose 1-phosphate that forms  has the covalently attached phosphate on the alpha,  or bottom face, as it's drawn in the figure.  The structure of glycogen phosphorylase  allows attack of it's phosphate from the bottom,  giving rise to alpha isomer only of glucose 1-phosphate.  The structure of the phosphorylase  precludes access of its phosphate  to the top face of the sugar molecule,  so you get only one stereoisomer of glucose 1-phosphate out  of this reaction.  The other product shown at the bottom of panel C  is the glycogen chain, which is truncated or shortened  by one glucose unit.  Now looking at the big picture, the epinephrine molecule  produced as part of the stress response  interacted with the cell membrane of the muscle cell.  And that interaction ultimately activated glycogen  phosphorylase to enable it to degrade glycogen, the storage  form of glucose, and liberate glucose 1-phosphate, which  is going to then find its way into glycolysis to generate  fast energy to enable the student  to be able to stand up in class and avoid  the stressful situation.  I'm not going to go through all of the details  of the chemical reactions of glycolysis.  You can find those in the book which  does a good job of presenting those details.  In the first step of glycolysis, we  see the phosphorylated hexose, glucose 6-phosphate,  be converted by phosphoglucoisomerase  into the furanose fructose 6-phosphate.  The next step involves the phosphorylation  of the fructose 6-phosphate by phosphofructokinase 1.  ATP is the phosphate donor, and you form fructose  1,6-bisphosphate as the product.  You'll notice that phosphofructokinase  catalyzes one way, a thermodynamically irreversible  reaction.  This step, like hexokinase we talked about earlier,  are sites of regulation of the pathway.  The word glycolysis comes from the Greek word sugar splitting,  and we're now at the step where the splitting  of the sugar from one 6-carbon compound into two  3-carbon compounds occurs.  The enzyme that splits the sugar in half is called aldolase.  And, again, I advise you to take a look  at the book to see the detail of the chemical reaction.  Briefly, the enzyme is going to form a proteinated Schiff base  at the number two carbon of the fructose 1,6-bisphosphate.  That proteinated Schiff base is going to draw electrons all  the way over from the hydroxyl group on carbon 4 of fructose  1,6-bisphosphate.  That movement of electrons is going  to result in cleavage of the molecule  into two parts at the broken line shown in the figure.  Carbons 1, 2, and 3 are going to form  DHAP, or dihydroxyacetone phosphate,  and carbons 4, 5, and 6 are going  to form GAP, or glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate.  GAP and DHAP are the products of the aldolase reaction.  As an aside, this is also a branch point in the pathway.  Dihydroxyacetone phosphate is an opportunity  for the cell to make the glycerol backbones of lipids  that we'll come to later.  So we see here that glycolysis is indeed  a resource that can be used for things  other than energy generation.  Now let's look at panel B.  Imagine that a cell is committed to make as much energy  as it can.  For example, the stand up, sit down  scenario we talked about earlier.  In that case, the enzyme TIM, or triosephosphate isomerase,  is going to interconvert very quickly dihydroxyacetone  phosphate and glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate,  and glyceraldehyde 2-phosphate is  going to be the molecule that progresses  along the glycolysis pathway.  In the next step of glycolysis, glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate  will be oxidized by glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate  dehydrogenase, or GAPDH.  Again, take a look at the mechanism in the book.  In brief, it involves attack by a thiol residue of a GAPDH  cysteine on the aldehydic carbon of glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate.  The product is a thiohemiacetal which is then oxidized.  Its electrons are transferred as hydride to NAD+ on the enzyme  to form NADH.  This is the only oxidation step in the pathway of glycolysis.  The oxidation of the hemiacetal produces the thioester,  and that thioester is a very high energy compound.  The thioester is attacked by inorganic phosphate to form  an acetylphosphate, another high energy compound,  which is called 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate.  The acetylphosphate of 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate then  phosphorylates ADP to form ATP in the first ATP forming step  of glycolysis.  Keep in mind that two molecules of GAP  have been formed in the upstream part of the pathway.  So for each molecule of glucose, you're  getting two molecules of ATP at this step.  The enzyme that does this phosphorylation  is phosphoglycerate kinase.  After 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate has lost its terminal phosphate  from the 1-carbon, it forms the acid 3-phosphoglycerate.  As a reminder, mutases are enzymes  that move a functional group from one atom  to another on the same molecule.  The next enzyme in the pathway is phosphoglycerate mutase,  which in effect moves the phosphate from the 3  to the 2-carbon, forming 2-phosphoglycerate, which  is the next intermediate in the glycolysis pathway.  Although it's easy to say that the phosphate is  quote unquote "moved," that is somewhat inaccurate.  If you look at the details of the step in the book,  you'll see that the reaction starts with the transfer  of a phosphate from the mutase protein to the substrate  3-phosphoglycerate, forming an intermediate bis-phosphorylated  product 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate.  As an aside, this is the same powerful allosteric effector  that JoAnne described when she taught us about how small  molecules can dramatically reduce the affinity  of hemoglobin for oxygen. In the case of the mutase, however,  the enzyme will take the phosphate off of the 3-hydroxyl  of 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate and the enzyme will  re-phosphorylate itself.  So the final product of the phosphoglycerate mutase  reaction is 2-phosphoglycerate.  Now let's turn to storyboard four.  In panel A, we see the enzyme enolase,  which removes the hydrogen from the 2-carbon  of 2-phosphoglycerate.  This is not an easy task.  The PK of that hydrogen is about 30.  Nevertheless, the reaction does occur and liberates water.  The product is phosphoenolpyruvate,  usually abbreviated PEP, or PEP, a very high energy compound.  We're now almost at the end of the pathway of glycolysis.  And as I mentioned earlier, one usually  looks for highly exergonic steps near the beginnings  or ends of pathways to see where the pathway is regulated.  Pyruvate kinase, or PK, the last step in the pathway  is such a regulation point.  The pyruvate kinase reaction occurs in two steps.  In the first step, phosphoenolpyruvate  phosphorylates ADP to form ATP.  The enol product then undergoes enol-keto tautomerization,  yielding the ketone pyruvate.  And pyruvate is the end of the pathway.  Let's turn now to story board five,  panel A. Let's take a look at this pathway  from a higher altitude.  First, as I just mentioned, the pathway  is regulated at the top and bottom  specifically at the hexokinase step,  the glycogen phosphorylase step, and the pyruvate kinase step.  It's also regulated in the middle, specifically  at the phosphofructokinase one step.  Regulation can be allosteric, which we  shall see as the case with PFK.  It also can be covalent.  We saw that this is the case with glycogen phosphorylase,  or GP.  The last lecture, we'll take a look  at regulation of these enzymes in great detail.  As a second issue, let's now look at the pathway  as drawn in summary form in panel B of this storyboard.  We start with a single molecule of the 6-carbon sugar glucose.  Hexokinase or glucokinase will utilize  one ATP to form a phosphorylated intermediate.  Phosphofructokinase-1 will use a second ATP to form a doubly  phosphorylated hexose, fructose 1,6-bisphosphate.  Bis-phosphorylated hexose will split  into two trioses, glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate and  dihydroxyacetone phosphate.  These are inter-convertible.  The chemical species glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate  is subjected to oxidation.  Because we get two molecules of GAP per molecule of glucose,  GAP oxidation will produce two molecules of NADH.  In the next step, we're going to make  two ATP's using the enzyme phosphoglycerate kinase.  At this point, we're ATP neutral.  We've consumed two ATP's and we've generated two ATP's.  And lastly, the enzyme pyruvate kinase is going to generate  an additional two ATP's.  I put those in a box, because these are the two net ATP's  for the whole pathway.  So that's the pathway of glycolysis.  I want to give you a little bit of a preview of coming  attractions at this point.  What you'll notice is that the pathway involves an oxidation  step in which we consumed two NAD+ molecules and generated  two NADH's.  NAD+ is derived from a vitamin.  We'll only have limited amounts of it.  We need to find a way to regenerate the NAD+ in order  to process the next molecule of glucose,  and we'll see that nature has several ways to solve that  problem.  Nature actually has three ways to regenerate NAD+.  The first we'll call alcoholic fermentation.  The second is homolactic fermentation,  and the third is respiration.  Alcoholic fermentation and homolactic fermentation  occur in the absence of oxygen. That is, anaerobically.  Respiration by definition is an aerobic process.  Now we'll look at each of these mechanisms of regeneration  of NAD+ in some detail, but also, in addition to NAD+,  you're going to have to generate a number of other products that  can be useful to the cell.  We'll see those later.  Let's look at panel C. Under anaerobic conditions,  yeast will take pyruvate and convert it initially  to acetaldehyde, and then reduce the acetaldehyde to ethanol.  These are the reactions of alcoholic fermentation.  Yeast uses an enzyme called pyruvate decarboxylase  to process the pyruvate.  Pyruvate decarboxylase, or PDC, has on it  a covalently attached thiamin pyrophosphate.  Thiamin is derived from vitamin B1.  As we go through the pyruvate decarboxylase reactions,  at the outset I want you to keep in mind  that PDC, pyruvate decarboxylase,  is very similar to the front end of the chemical reaction  series that's conducted by an enzyme present in mammals  like us.  That enzyme complex has pyruvate dehydrogenase,  which we'll come to a little later when we  talk about respiration.  The thiazole ring in TPP forms an ylide.  That means that despite the fact that the PKA of the thiamin  pyrophosphate is about 19, you are  able to form a carbanion at the carbon of the thiazolium ring  system.  That carbanion attacks the middle carbon of pyruvate,  converting it from a ketone to an alcohol.  Now you have the thiazolium ring system with the positive charge  beta to the carboxylate of pyruvate.  That system readily decarboxylates  as shown, liberating thiamin pyrophosphate and the product,  acetaldehyde.  The next enzyme in this small pathway  is alcohol dehydrogenase which utilizes  NADH, which came in, in principle, from the GAPDH  step of glycolysis.  Alcohol dehydrogenase uses the glycolysis-derived NADH  to reduce the aldehyde functionality of acetaldehyde  to form the product of this pathway, ethanol.  Ethanol is an alcohol, hence the name alcoholic fermentation.  So looking at this small pathway in total, what you see  is that you form CO2 as a first product, which  could be the bubbles in a carbonated beverage  or what makes bread rise, and form ethanol  as the other major product.  And, of course, you get your NAD+ back,  which you can then return to glycolysis,  specifically the GAPDH step of glycolysis,  to enable metabolic processing of the next molecule  of glucose.  So this is the pathway that yeast  and other alcohol-forming organisms  use to maintain redox neutrality within the cell.  I'm on storyboard six, and we're going to start with panel D.  The second general mechanism that we're going to look  at that concerns the regeneration of NAD+  for glycolysis is called homolactic fermentation.  This occurs in mammals and in lactic acid bacteria.  And like alcoholic fermentation, it  is also a process that occurs anaerobically.  That is, in the absence of oxygen.  As you can see, pyruvate is a keto acid,  and the ketone at the number 2 carbon can be easily reduced.  In this case, NADH will transfer hydride to the ketone  in order to reduce it to the alcohol lactate.  The net reaction here involves consumption of one NADH  and the production of one NAD+.  And this NAD+ of course, can go back and be utilized to enable  oxidation of the next molecule of glucose passing through  the glycolytic pathway.  When a mammal is running hard, this  is the pathway by which we achieve redox  neutrality and glycolysis.  When we exercise intensely, lactate  is produced in excess to keep the glycolytic pathway active.  The lactate causes the blood pH to go down.  That is, the blood becomes more acidic because lactic acid has  a low PKA.  I also want to point out that this anaerobic pathway is also  the basis for production of lactate by lactic acid  bacteria, which is critical to the manufacturing of yogurt.  Let's look now at panel E. The third pathway to regenerate  NAD+ for glycolysis is respiration.  We're going to be going through respiration in some detail  later, but right now I'm going to give you  a very high level view of it.  In the way of an introduction, the mitochondrial intermembrane  is very well equipped to be able to transport electrons.  Those electrons will travel along  in an electron transport chain to oxygen, reducing the oxygen  we breathe into water.  This is a highly energy generating process,  and the energy that's generated is part of the driving  force for the synthesis of ATP.  The details of how a respiring organism generates ATP  is covered later.  For right now, however, let's just say that the mitochondrial  membrane oxidizes NADH to regenerate the NAD+ needed  to sustain glycolysis.  And, again, we'll see the details  of how this happens later.  Later, I'll also cover the ways that redox neutrality is  maintained in a mammalian cell.  In brief, NAD+ is generated from NADH in aerobes by a series  of reactions that I call quote unquote "the shuttles,"  which will be covered in section 12.  Before we go on, let me give you a little recap of where we are.  We've seen that there are a couple of optional beginnings  for glycolysis.  It can begin with intake of glucose from the blood,  or it can begin with the breakdown of glycogen  by glycogenolysis.  The formal pathway takes glucose as glucose 6-phosphate down  to pyruvate.  We get a total of two ATP's in that process,  and we produce two NADH's.  Now, however, we've got to have a way to be able to regenerate  our NAD+ from those NADH's in order to be able to make  the pathway ready to process the next molecule of glucose.  Accordingly, nature developed three endings to the pathway  that result in the regeneration of NAD+.  These endings are alcoholic fermentation,  homolactic fermentation, and respiration.  Looking at that picture in panel E once again, in us,  respiration happens in the mitochondria  and primarily in the mitochondrial intermembrane  and in the jelly-like mitochondrial matrix.  Pyruvate generated in the cytoplasm--  that's the compartment where glycolysis occurs--  goes through the porous outer membrane of the mitochondria.  Then, the pyruvate encounters the membrane-bound pyruvate  dehydrogenase complex, which is our next topic.  In bacteria, which are in many ways like mitochondria,  respiration happens in the cellular membrane  and in the cell's cytoplasm.  Let's take a look at panel A of storyboard seven.  We're about to start our discussion of respiration,  which is the oxidative metabolism  of all metabolic fuels via the common intermediate acetyl CoA.  In mammals, as I said earlier, these  are mitochondrial reactions.  At the outset, I also want to point out  that we have seen that carbohydrates  can be metabolized either anaerobically or aerobically.  As we'll see when we use lipids as our metabolic fuels,  they can only be metabolized aerobically.  Lipids break down to acetyl CoA, which is then  oxidized by the TCA cycle.  Let's take a look at panel B. When  we talked about alcoholic fermentation earlier,  I said that yeast have a pyruvate decarboxylase complex,  and I said that the reactions of the pyruvate decarboxylase  complex are very similar to the reactions in the early part  of the pyruvate dehydrogenase reaction, which  is a little bit more complex.  Pyruvate dehydrogenase has three activities, E1, E2, and E3.  As with pyruvate decarboxylase, E1  has a thiamine pyrophosphate unit, TPP, and ylide on the TPP  attacks the middle carbon of the pyruvate.  Specifically, it's ketone carbon.  At this point, you're going to want  to take a look at detailed notes that I've provided  as supplemental material.  This supplemental material will be  referred to as slide one, slide two, and so on.  Looking at slide one, you can see that decarboxylation  happens exactly the same way that I  described for the pyruvate decarboxylase system.  Now take a look at slides two through six.  In the case of PDH, pyruvate dehydrogenase,  unlike the situation with PDC, pyruvate decarboxylase,  restructuring of the carboxyethyl group  is going to result in the formation of our carbanion  that's going to attack the disulfide of lipoic acid.  Looking at slide seven, you'll see the conversion  of the hydroxyethyl to a keto functionality  jettisons the TPP, resulting in a thioester in which there  is an acyl group connected to lipoic acid.  At this point, the thiol of coenzyme A  attacks the keto oxygen of the thioester,  producing acetyl CoA, which is going  to become a very important molecule as we move ahead.  The second product is reduced lipoic acid.  Technically, the formation of reduced lipoic acid  is the oxidation step of the pyruvate dehydrogenase  reaction.  The decarboxylation step that happened  a few steps earlier is basically the production of CO2  that we eventually will breathe out when we exhale.  Now let's look at slide eight.  The reducing equivalents on the E2 subunits  present as reduced lipoic acid will  move across the E2 subunit toward the E3 subunit.  The E3 subunit has an oxidized disulfide bond on it,  which was created by the connection of two  cysteines on the protein.  That oxidized disulfide is then reduced  by transfer of the reducing equivalents  from the reduced lipoic acid to the disulfide.  And then finally, the reducing equivalents  are passed from the reduced disulfide to FAD to form FADH2.  That FADH2 passes along its reducing equivalents to NAD+  forming NADH.  This NADH is soluble and will move to its next location.  Specifically, this NADH will return to the mitochondrial  membrane-- actually to another place in the mitochondrial  membrane--  an enzyme called complex one, and be oxidized in the electron  transport chain.  Overall, one pyruvate enters the PDH complex.  We lose its carboxylate as CO2.  We generate from pyruvate's residue an acetyl coenzyme A.  And at the very end, we get an NADH,  which will then go on to the electron transport complex  to be oxidized.  The formation of NAD+, as I mentioned above,  is critical to allow further oxidation of reduce.  That is, energy rich molecule such as glucose. 