 [SQUEAKING]  [RUSTLING]  [CLICKING]  PROFESSOR: In this goodie bag, we'll  be exploring atomic packing and solids  through the cubic Bravais lattices.  We'll make three ball-and-stick models of different cubic unit  cells.  For this, you will need 31 balls and 44 sticks--  24 for FCC, 12 for SC, and 8 for BCC.  If you don't have a fancy crystal modeling kit like this,  any ball-and-stick equivalents will work.  A delicious alternative would be using  toothpicks and marshmallows.  The objective of the goodie bag is  to explore the different structures  of crystalline materials.  As you build the models, consider how many  nearest neighbors an atom has in an SC, a BCC, and an FCC  crystal.  So now we're going to construct our Bravais lattices.  We'll start with simple cubing.  Begin by taking 8 balls and connecting them with  sticks such that each ball sits at the corner of a cube.  Then for body-centered cubic, we're  going to start with a single ball in the center of a cube  and connect to 8 other balls at the corners with sticks.  For face-centered cubic, it's going  to be a little more involved.  We'll start with the corner of a cube and form tetrahedra  to other balls, which themselves will form tetrahedra  to another corner of a cube.  If we iterate through this process,  we eventually end up with a full face-centered cubic lattice.  We've now constructed three ball-and-stick models  of cubic Bravais lattices.  The simple cubic lattice has atoms  at each of the 8 corners of the unit cell.  The body-centered cubic lattice has an additional atom  in the body center of the unit cell.  And the face-centered cubic lattice  has an additional atom in each of the 6 face  centers of the unit cell.  Each of these lattices has a different coordination number.  That is, an atom in each lattice has a different number  of nearest neighbors.  If we imagine these atoms as hard spheres  rather than this ball-and-stick model,  we can see that each lattice will also  have a different atomic packing factor.  That is, each lattice will have a different volume of space  occupied in the unit cell.  In general, the coordination number of a lattice  correlates with atomic packing factor, which itself  correlates with stability.  That's why we don't often find simple cubic metallic solids  in nature. 