 BABATUNDE OGUNLADE: Hello, everyone.  Today we're going to be working through Goodie Bag  5, which is on electronic materials, namely  semiconductors.  In order to follow along, you'll need  a multimeter, a pair of alligator clips,  some large LEDs--  I'll be using red, white, blue, and green--  and some regular sized LEDs.  I'll be using red, blue, and purple.  Our main objectives today are to identify differently  colored LEDs by irradiating them with light  across the visible light spectrum.  And in the process, to explore the relationship  between the bandgap of a semiconductor  and its critical absorption wavelength.  As we work through the Goodie Bag,  I'd like you to think about how the size of the bandgap  of material may influence which wavelengths of light  you can absorb.  Let's get started.  First, connect your black or negative lead  to the 10 amp port on the multimeter,  and then your red or positive lead  to the voltage ohm milliamp port.  Then connect the probe end of each respective lead  to one end of an alligator clip.  After you do this, you should still  have two free ends of the alligator clips.  Grab one of your small LEDs and connect the free end  of the alligator clip connected to the red lead probe  to the positive end of the LED.  This is the longer leg of the LED.  And then connect the other free end  that's connected to the black lead probe  to the negative end of the LED.  That's the short leg of the LED.  Then turn on your multimeter and set the dial  to 2,000 milli DC volts.  This is the order of magnitude of voltage  we'll measure across our small LEDs  when we irradiate them with light from the larger LEDs.  Finally, make sure to keep track of which small  LED you're testing so that which LED  to refer to when we start comparing  data between small LEDs.  So now we have our small LED hooked up to our multimeter.  And now we're going to shine each one of our large LEDs  onto the small LED and record whether or not we have  some non-zero voltage reading.  If the large LED has enough energy  to excite electrons across the bandgap of the small LED,  we should see some non-zero voltage across the small LED.  So first I'm going to try and shine this blue light  onto my small LED, and I'm going to look at the multimeter  and try to see if there's some voltage drop.  As you can see, our volt meter is now  measuring some non-zero value, which  means that this blue light has enough energy to excite  electrons across its bandgap.  After you've done this, repeat this for the other large LEDs,  and then repeat the entire experiment for the other two  small LEDs.  This should generate a set of 12 data points.  And using our knowledge of bandgaps and wavelength  absorption, as well as the data that you've acquired,  we're going to determine which small LED is what color.  So after running through your experiments,  you should have some chart that looks like mine, where  I have my small LEDs going down the side here  and the large LEDs going across.  So each square represents a time when  a small LED he was irradiated by a large LED.  And a check represents when a non-zero voltage was measured  across the multimeter, and an x represents  when there was a zero or very low  voltage reading across the LED.  So in order to dig into what this means  it's important to understand the balance  of the visible light spectrum in terms of energy and wavelength.  So if you remember the visible light spectrum,  known wonderfully by the acronym ROYGBIV, where  you have red on one end and you have violet on the other end,  we know that red corresponds to around 700  nanometers in wavelength.  And we know that violet or purple corresponds  to around 40 nanometers of wavelength.  And if we think back to the relationship between the energy  of light and its wavelength, we know that the formula  is E equals hc over lambda.  So as the wavelength of light decreases, the energy of light  increases.  So going across, as we go from red, green, blue, and white,  we have increasing energy because we  have decreasing wavelength.  And just as a reminder, white is a composite  of red, blue, and green.  So it has all three of these combined in it.  So now let's start to identify which LED is what color.  So if you look at small LED 1, it  was irradiated by red, green, blue, and white light.  And there was a voltage drop across the LED for all of them.  That means that at the very least,  red had enough energy to excite electrons  across the bandgap of that small LED.  Because that's the case, and we know  that we're dealing with LEDs which  emit like in the visible light spectrum,  we know that this small LED then must be red.  So if we look at small LED 2, we can  see that both red and green light did not  have enough energy to excite electrons  across the bandgap of the second LED.  But when we shined blue light onto the LED,  we got a non-zero voltage drop.  And the same thing when we shined white light, which  also has blue light in it.  Because, like I said at the beginning,  we knew that our small these were red, blue, and purple,  and we've already found our red LED,  that means that this LED must be the blue.  So finally, if we look at small LED number 3,  we can see that red, green, blue, and white light  did not have sufficient energy to cause some voltage drop  across the LED.  If we look back to ROYGBIV, and we  think about the energy of red to blue,  that means that they didn't have enough energy  to excite anything after it.  And that means that our final LED must be violent or purple.  So by shining light across the visible light spectrum  onto our small LEDs, we're able to identify  which one of our small LEDs are what color.  So right here I have small LED 1 hooked up to the multimeter.  And we determined it was red.  And so we can check that by just turning on the LED.  So as you can see, this LED is shining  red, which means it's the red LED,  and we're able to confirm that by using our data as well.  You can check that the other two LEDs  are the colors that we determined  by doing the same thing.  So today we looked at a direct application of semiconductors  in LEDs.  We looked at the relationship between the bandgap of an LED,  of a semiconductor, and the range of light that  can absorb across its bandgap.  We found that for semiconductors, there  are some critical absorption wavelengths,  some maximum wavelength, below which the LED will absorb  all other wavelengths of light. 