 Newton's second law states that the sum  of the forces on an object is equal to the acceleration  of that object times the mass.  But what if instead this object is actually two objects?  Do I now need to consider the forces that are acting  between each of these parts?  Or what if I consider the object to be made out  of even smaller parts?  I can take it down to its smallest components  and consider the interactions between all  of the atoms in the object.  This seems like an overwhelming number of forces  that I'm going to need to calculate just to find  the force on this object.  But I never seem to calculate this many forces.  Why is that?  All of these forces between the atoms in the object  cancel out because they are Newton's third law pairs.  If both objects are within the system-- since a Newton's  third law a pair of forces is equal  and opposite-- the total force is just zero.  We call these internal forces.  That is, forces that are acting between a pair of objects that  are both within our system.  On the other hand, external forces--  forces that act on an object within the system by an object  outside the system-- are what we need to consider  for our calculation.  We could be more precise about Newton's second law  and say that the total external force on the system  is equal to the system's acceleration times the system's  mass.  Let's look at an example of how the selection of a system  will affect the forces that we need to consider.  I have three blocks.  I'll call them one, two, and three, and a force that's  pushing block one to the right.  We'll first take a minute to look at notation.  We will write the forces as F12.  And this means that it's the force exerted by an object  one acting on an object two.  In this example, I have pairs of forces between each block.  The interaction between blocks one and two.  And the interaction between blocks two and three.  Let's look at the internal and external forces on the system  if my system is made up of block one and block two.  I have this external pushing force-- F  external-- that's acting from the external pusher on block  one.  Blocks one and two are interacting with each other.  But these are both within my system.  So these are internal forces that I do not  need to worry about.  And finally block two, which is within my system,  is interacting with block 3, which is outside my system.  The external force here is the force  that is acting from block three on block two.  Now we know that the two forces that  are relevant to calculating the motion of the system  are the external pushing force and F32.  If my system is instead made up of blocks one and three,  block two is now part of the extremal environment.  Can you figure out what the internal and external forces  are?  In this case, the external forces to the system  are the external pushing force F external, F21, and F23. 