 The following content is provided under a Creative  Commons license.  Your support will help MIT OpenCourseWare  continue to offer high quality educational resources for free.  To make a donation or view additional materials  from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT OpenCourseWare  at ocw.mit.edu.  PROFESSOR: We're now at storyboard 23.  Let's look at panel A. Our last metabolism  topic under the general umbrella of catabolism is ketone bodies.  Ketone bodies are only covered in two pages in the book,  but they're medically very important.  The medical relevance of ketone bodies  stems from their role in starvation  and their role in diabetes.  Let's look at panel A. This panel shows various sources of  and uses of acetyl CoA.  It shows that ketone bodies are made from Acetyl coenzyme A.  So let's start this part of the lecture  with a discussion of where acetyl CoA comes from,  and what its various states are including  the formation of ketone bodies.  We just finished talking about fatty acid catabolism.  So let's start on the right of this figure.  We see that a fatty acid can be broken down  to form acetyl CoA by beta oxidation,  usually with the objective of generating energy.  If we follow the acetyl CoA from beta oxidation  down into the TCA cycle, we see that it  will be fully oxidized to carbon dioxide with the generation  of a lot of energy that can be used  for mechanical work, biosynthesis, and other things.  A second source of Acetyl CoA can  be seen to the left, where we see  glycogen breakdown to glucose or glucose  can be directly imported into a cell.  In either case, the glucose that we take in or liberate  from its storage depot, glycogen,  can be converted into acetyl coenzyme A.  Glycerol can be generated from the backbone  of a metabolized triacylglyceride.  It enters glycolysis as dihydroxyacetone phosphate  and then can progress to acetyl CoA by way of glycolysis.  Alanine can transiminate into pyruvate,  which is converted subsequently to acetyl CoA  by pyruvate dehydrogenase.  This diagram shows us that many pathways converge  to generate acetyl coenzyme A. Carbohydrates, amino acids,  fatty acids, all can act as a source  of this important precursor to energy.  Aside from being processed by the TCA cycle, on the left,  we see a broken line pathway involving  fatty acid biosynthesis.  This is going to be the next topic we come to  after this discussion of ketone body formation.  The pathway on the right with the broken lines  is the pathway leading to ketone bodies  which is called ketogenesis.  In the box at the top of panel A is a cartoon reminding me  to tell you that acetyl CoA cannot escape from the cell.  Moreover, it cannot even easily escape from the mitochondrion.  In order for acetyl CoA to leave the cell  and be transported from one organ to another,  it needs to be converted into ketone bodies.  Another way to look at ketone bodies  is that these are mobile or portable forms  of Acetyl CoA that can go from a source organ, which is usually  the liver, to a target organ, which may need them in order  to generate energy by way of the TCA cycle.  The target organ for example could be brain  under conditions of starvation, or it  could be skeletal muscle if you have  to run away from something.  Let's look at panel B. There are five key facts that we need  to know about ketone bodies.  First, Ketogenesis mainly occurs in the liver.  The liver manufactures ketone bodies  and then exports them to other organs for use.  These reactions typically happen when the levels of oxaloacetate  become limiting in their mitochondrion.  And I'll give you an example of why  this is the case when I talk about starvation a little later  in this lecture.  The second important fact is that these  are the primary metabolic fuels of the heart and skeletal  muscle under normal conditions.  The third fact is that ketone bodies  become the major metabolic fuel of all cells  under conditions of starvation, even  cells of the brain after a few days of starvation  will convert from glucose being the preferred metabolic fuel  to accepting ketone bodies as their major source of energy.  The fourth fact I want to talk about with regard  to ketone bodies is that they are  produced in excess in diabetes.  I'll talk a little bit more about that  later in the lecture.  Finally, ketogenesis occurs in the mitochondrion, primarily  the mitochondrion of the liver.  So these are mitochondrial reactions.  Panel C shows the three classical ketone bodies,  acetoacetate, beta hydroxybutyrate, and acetone.  From the standpoint of chemical accuracy,  it's obvious that beta hydroxybutyrate  is an alcohol and not a ketone.  Nevertheless, it's lumped in with the ketone bodies  for historical reasons.  Acetoacetate and beta hydroxybutyrate  are what I'll call quote unquote "useful" ketone  bodies from the standpoint of serving as precursors  to metabolic energy.  Acetone by contrast, is not useful by this criterion.  Acetone however, is a useful biomarker,  because sometimes its presence can help diagnose diabetes.  On a personal note, I come from a long line of diabetics.  I remember when I was a little kid, my dad before he  was diagnosed, would come home from work  at the end of the day.  He had very poor circulation.  So my two sisters and I would try  to rub his legs to give him a kind of massage  to make his circulation a little bit better.  I remember very clearly my older sister saying, "gee,  dad smells like mom's nail polish remover,"  and that's because he was a diabetic producing  acetone, which was used at the time at least  as nail polish remover.  We had no idea at the time what was going on.  A few months later, my dad was diagnosed as a type 2 diabetic.  I now know that the fruity odor we smelled on his breath  was acetone.  As I said, acetone is a biomarker of this disease.  One last point with regard to the story board.  Note that the acetoacetate and beta hydroxybutyrate molecules  are acids.  In diabetics, these acids can be produced  as we'll see later in sufficiently  high concentrations to lower the pH of the blood  quite substantially.  Keep in mind that lowering the pH  is the same thing as increasing the concentration of protons  in the blood.  These concentrated protons will have physiological relevance  that I'll discuss later.  When a diabetic enters the phase where the pH of their blood  is dangerously low, that's called diabetic acidosis.  Let's now turn to Panel D. At this point  I want to describe the detailed biochemical reactions that  give rise to ketone bodies.  To make a ketone body we're going  to need three molecules of acetyl coenzyme  A. One of these molecules is going to be catalytic.  That is, it's going to be restored at the overall end  of the process of ketogenesis.  Let's start by imagining a scenario  in the mitochondrion of a liver cell  where oxaloacetate becomes limiting.  I'll talk about physiological states under which oxaloacetate  becomes limiting or sparse a little bit later.  Acetyl CoA cannot enter the TCA cycle,  because citrate synthase lacks oxaloacetate as a reaction  partner.  The concentration of acetyl CoA starts to accumulate.  Then the beta ketothiolase reaction  that is the last step in fatty acid bio oxidation  reverses owing to the high concentration of product acetyl  CoA.  So two acetyl CoAs come together in order  to form acetoacetyl coenzyme A. Note  that I put markers on each of the carbons  of the acetoacetyl coenzyme A. A third acetoacetyl coenzyme  A is then added to the gamma carbon  of the acetoacetyl coenzyme A. That's the carbon that  has the filled-in square.  The enzyme that catalyzed this last reaction  is HMG Coenzyme A reductase, where HMG stands  for hydroxymethylglutaryl.  HMG CoA is a six-carbon branch chain molecule.  In the present situation, we're going  to look at HMG CoA as the source of ketone bodies  in the mitochondrion, but I want you  to keep in mind that if this reaction were  to occur not in the mitochondrion  but in the cytoplasm, the resulting HMG CoA could  be used for other pathways.  For example, HMG CoA in the cytosol  is the precursor to cholesterol.  With that in mind, let's return our attention  to the mitochondrion and ketogenesis.  The mitochondrial enzyme HMG CoA lyase  will split the HMG CoA, knocking off  an acetyl CoA in liberating as the final product  acetoacetate, which is our first of three ketone bodies.  Acetoacetate is a beta keto acid and hence,  prone to spontaneous decarboxylation.  Non enzymatically, this will happen at some slow rate  in order to liberate CO2 and produce acetone, which  is our second ketone body.  This acetone gives the fruity smell  to the breath of a diabetic whose disease is out  of control.  Acetone is not going to be biochemically useful to us,  for example it's not going to be metabolized to generate energy.  The second chemical fate of the acetoacetate  is its reduction by NADH using the enzyme beta hydroxybutyrate  dehydrogenase.  This reduction forms our third ketone body beta  hydroxybutyrate, which is a biochemically useful molecule  in that it serves as a good metabolic fuel.  Acetoacetate and beta hydroxybutyrate  do not need any kind of special transporter  to get out of the cell into the blood.  They diffuse through the mitochondrial membrane  and later through the cell membrane.  They are then transported by the circulatory system  from the liver to organs that need them for energy.  As you mentioned above, ketone bodies  are portable forms of acetyl CoA.  In a real sense, the liver by making these ketone bodies  is acting as a food caterer where  ketone bodies represent food that's  delivered to other organs.  At this point let's look at storyboard 24  panel A. Now let's take a look what  happens when the ketone bodies travel by the blood  and are taken up by another organ such as muscle.  Acetoacetate, which I'll refer to as ketone body  one is good to go and is ready to enter  the main stream of metabolism.  So I'm going to come back to it in a minute.  The beta hydroxybutyrate, by contrast,  has to be processed in order for it  to be useful to the target organ skeletal muscle in this case.  In step two, the muscle form of beta hydroxybutyrate  dehydrogenase will use NAD plus to oxidize  the beta hydroxybutyrate into acetoacetate, which  joins the pool of acetoacetate that came in directly  from the blood.  We now have to put a thioester group on the acetoacetate,  and that comes from an unusual source.  In step three you'll see a succinyl coenzyme A  from the TCA cycle giving its coenzyme  A residue to acetoacetate, which results  in the formation of acetoacetyl coenzyme A.  This reaction happens in the mitochondrion of the cell.  At step four acetyl coenzyme A is  converted by beta ketothiolase into two molecules  of acetyl coenzyme A. And again, we're  going to need another coenzyme A group  to come in at this point as part of the beta ketothiolase  reaction.  Remember that beta ketothiolase is  the last enzyme that's operative in beta oxidation  of fatty acids.  Here it's doing the same chemistry  that it does in beta oxidation.  It splits acetoacetyl CoA into two acetyl CoA molecules.  And in steps five and six, those molecules  integrate into the TCA cycle.  In the TCA cycle they're oxidized to carbon dioxide  with the generation of energy.  Let me review for a minute before going  into a physiological scenario.  Way over to the left at step one,  the liver has made acetyl CoA and packaged it  into two ketone bodies, acetoacetate  and beta hydroxybutyrate.  They travel in the blood to target tissues,  for example, the muscle, or heart, or the brain.  In these target tissues these ketone bodies are internalized,  converted to acetoacetate, and then to acetoacetyl coenzyme A  and then ultimately to several molecules of acetyl coenzyme A.  The acetyl coenzyme A that started in the liver,  ends up in the target tissue and then can  be used to generate energy.  This is a particularly important reaction under conditions  of starvation and diabetes.  Let's now look at panel b of storyboard 24.  As you know, I like to look at physiological scenarios  because at least to me, they helped make biochemistry real.  The scenario I want to look at is that of diabetes.  In Type 2 diabetes, which is the type that I have,  my cells have become resistant to taking up glucose.  My cells are insulin insensitive.  After a meal I have very, very high concentrations  of glucose in my blood, because the cells of my tissues  are not capable of taking it in.  Hence, if I do not take my anti-diabetic medication  the sugar concentration in my blood  stays high, which leads to some of the medical complications  of diabetes.  More on that later.  Given that there's a lot of glucose in my blood,  but it's not getting into my cells,  my cells are actually in a technical state of starvation.  Take a look at the pathway I've drawn in panel b.  Glucose on the left is not getting into the cell.  I've used broken lines for the pathway from glucose  to pyruvate and then from pyruvate in the cytoplasm  into the mitochondrial matrix.  These broken lines are meant to indicate  that the pathways involved are just not very active.  The sparse activity of these pathways  means that acetyl CoA levels are becoming somewhat  limiting in the mitochondrion.  Because pyruvate is also limiting,  the enzyme pyruvate carboxylase doesn't  have sufficient pyruvate in order  to maintain the oxaloacetate concentration  within the mitochondrial matrix.  Once again, oxaloacetate is the TCA cycle intermediate  that that's at the lowest, that is micromolar concentration.  I'm focusing here on the liver, although I  should add at this point that all tissues are  similarly limited in the pathways indicated  by the broken lines.  The liver's response to sensing this limitation  in carbohydrate processing is to either take in lipid  or to break it down from internal stores,  for example, triacylglycerides in order to produce acetyl CoA.  But because oxaloacetate is limiting,  the step at beta ketothiolase backs up,  producing a large amount of ketone bodies.  The ketone bodies are produced in excess,  so you can see them escaping into the mitochondrion  and later out of the cell, and they go off into the blood.  Consequently, the liver of diabetics  produces a lot of ketone bodies, because it senses  that the body is starving,  To the right of panel B, I have some blood chemistry values  that are of relevance to diabetics.  In a non-diabetic person, blood sugar concentrations,  that is blood glucose is maintained  at about 100 milligrams of glucose  per 100 milliliters of blood.  When I was diagnosed with diabetes,  my blood sugar was over 300 milligrams per 100 milliliters.  As I recall the symptoms were disorientation.  I couldn't walk very easily, I was thirsty,  and I urinated a lot.  Normal ketone body concentrations  are less than 0.2 nanomolar.  In a severe diabetic situation, your ketone body concentrations  could be 15 to 25 millimolar and the pH of your blood  could drop from the mid 7 range down to about 6.8.  The kidney responds to the high concentration of glucose  and the high concentration of protons,  that is the low pH, by increasing urine volume output  in order to try to urinate out the glucose and protons.  The results are that the diabetic becomes excessively  thirsty which again is one of the biomarkers  or symptoms of the disease.  The classic historical treatment of diabetes  is to give insulin, which will push more glucose into the cell  and thus offset the biochemical defect that leads ultimately  to ketone bodies and to the high concentration of glucose  in the blood.  Aside from giving insulin by injection  there are other medications that will  result in a sort of reactivation of the beta cells  in the pancreas in order to produce more insulin naturally.  Alternatively, there are medications  that will block gluconeogenesis and thus  stop the ability of the liver and other gluconeogenic organs  from producing glucose.  So by blocking gluconeogenesis, one  can lower the glucose concentration of the blood.  As you see there are many, many ways to treat this disease.  Let me add that it can be a very debilitating disease, leading  to blindness, amputation, and cardiovascular difficulties.  It's a good idea to try to avoid the risk  factors for this disease.  It's not fully preventable at least  in people who come from families in which nearly everybody gets  it, for example, my situation.  But by avoiding risk factors you can push off the date of onset  by many years. 