 The following content is provided under a Creative Commons license.  Your support will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to offer high quality educational  resources for free.  To make a donation, or to view additional materials from hundreds of MIT courses, visit  MIT OpenCourseWare at ocw.mit.edu.  MICHEL DEGRAFF: I think it's a nice topic to end this semester, because in a way, it  brings together, I think, some of the main threads that we've through this semester.  But also, in fact, the last point of the text, alliteration I can sense my point to wait  into the future.  So without further ado, we have Lorraine, Will, and Cynthia.  GUEST SPEAKER: So this is our presentation on language resistance and liberation.  Welcome to the last day of class.  Congratulations (CHUCKLING) for getting this far.  So as the road map, we're going to go through first "Rethinking Literacy, A Dialogue," the  piece by Freire and Macedo.  Macedo?  MICHEL DEGRAFF: Freire and Macedo.  GUEST SPEAKER: Macedo?  MICHEL DEGRAFF: Macedo.  GUEST SPEAKER: Macedo.  And then we're going to look at the "Literacy and Critical Pedagogy" piece, and then end  with the MIT Haiti initiatives.  GUEST SPEAKER: OK.  So this is just a little bit of a background on the writers of the first two pieces.  Both of them are educators in critical pedagogy.  And one is from Brazil, and one is Cape Verdean-American.  GUEST SPEAKER: So in the first piece, Freire mentions the premise-- the main premises of  culture, and I think that these are really important to keep in mind, because this is  a really interesting and, I think, powerful way to frame culture.  The first one is that cultural processes are intimately connected with social relations,  especially with class relations and class formations, with sexual divisions, with racial  structuring of social relations, and with age oppressions as a form of dependency.  Got it? [chuckling]  OK. The second one, culture involves power and helps to produce asymmetries in the abilities  of individuals and social groups to define and realize their needs.  And third one, culture is neither autonomous nor an externally determined field, but a  site of social difficulties and struggles.  Those ideas are really important to keep in mind, because this paper also raises the idea--  I know it is a social field, which is kind of the combination of all of the beliefs,  myths, aspirations, hopes of a part of a society, of a culture, and so it includes things such  as why racial hierarchies exist, to why sexual divisions exist, and like what roles gender  people play in a society.  And it's really important to keep that in mind, because if you're able to keep that  in mind, then you're able to think critically about that.  And through the critical process of engaging with it, you're able to change the social field.  And so I think that that's important, because even though this paper raises a lot of really  powerful ideas, it's still not perfect.  So one of the quotes of this paper is, "Literacy's oral dimension is important, even if it takes  place in a culture, like that of the United States, whose memory is predominantly written,  not oral, like that of Africa."  Africa is not (LAUGHING) country.  And so something like that is also part of the social field, and would make it into this paper.  Because even though Freire and Macedo are thinking critically about this, they are not  engaging with the full reality of cultural objectivity and being subjects within that.  GUEST SPEAKER: Yeah.  So in the next article, Paulo Freire talks about the use of language as a form of resistance.  And he first starts talking about how the current traditional methods in literacy how  they tend to ignore the importance of language in a person's education.  And he bases a lot of his theories on his experiences.  And from the second quote he says that, "The sad reality is that while education in Portuguese  provides access to positions of political and economic power for the higher echelon  of African society, it screens out the majority of the masses, who fail to learn Portuguese  well enough to acquire the necessary literacy skills for social, economic, and political  advancement."  And you definitely-- from the way that he mentions this, you could definitely see a  lot of like correlations between what's going on around the world and currently in the United  States.  And you could definitely see that the 1% usually have the most control over things, and that  they usually tends to drive how policies are made.  But the fact is that when a person is taught in their native language, they tend to learn  things better and comprehend things faster.  And can we go to the next slide?  There's usually backlash when it comes to different languages taught in schools.  For example, in the US, people say that students should learn how to speak standard American  English.  But when it comes to providing these sort of opportunities to minority groups of, I  guess for instance, like students of color, there is usually some racial tensions that  develop that make minority students feel inferior.  For example, there was an article mentioned of like recently, like March of 2017, that  talked about a robotics team that recently had won the challenge, and the fact that after  they had won the students-- or I guess people in the crowd started screaming at them and  telling them to go back to Mexico.  And so this form of like demeaning commentary tends to drive the dropout rates of minority  groups, and all of this tends to contribute to like the prison-- sorry, the school to  prison pipeline.  As you can see in the infographic, it gives a lot of percentages talking about this sort  of issue.  You can see in the bottom, it says that 68% of all males in state and federal prison they  do not have a high school diploma.  And this tends to be-- gives statistics on students.  And all of this tends to stem from the fact that minority students do not have the same  access to education as the elite part of society.  And from personal experience, I can definitely relate to this.  I went to a school about like an hour and a half from my house, and I definitely did  have a lot of good role models growing up.  But were definitely students around my neighborhood that didn't have the same access to the same  opportunities that I did.  Some of them did drop out to start working.  Others were influenced by gangs around my neighborhood.  And you could definitely-- things are definitely getting better, but things could definitely  be improved from an emancipatory literacy approach, which is what Paulo Freire mentions.  Yeah.  So in emancipatory literacy, this involves using the language of the people, rather than  the elites.  It teaches students to accept their experiences and their culture.  And this moves from the world of objectivity to the world of subjectivity, where individuals  learn to accept themselves for who they are, rather than feel like they're a victim of  society.  And Paulo Freire does mention that achieving emancipatory literacy is hard, but it's not  impossible.  And now I'll-- and so Lorraine wants to talk about a few examples of how this is being  used today.  So considering specifically the case of Haiti-- which Michel works a lot on, the MIT Haiti  initiative-- virtually all of the schooling in both K through 12 education and then in  higher education is done in French, and not in Kreyol.  But the problem is that most people only speak Kreyol fluently, so like 95% or so, and very  few people speak French fluently, at all.  So when you go through school, and everything is in a language that you don't understand,  how are you supposed to be able to actually get any of the education, get any of this  social engagement, especially if children are punished for speaking Kreyol in school.  And they can't interact with each other, can't ask questions, can't gather any of the information  that's coming at them.  So it's based on this false belief and really outdated belief about the hierarchy of languages,  about which languages are created or are younger, or anything like that, and that Kreyol isn't  developed enough to be able to be used for technical language for STEM education to have  anything translated into Kreyol.  And part of that is saying that like Kreyol isn't widespread enough, even though Kreyol  has almost 10 million speakers.  Finnish has only about 5.5 million speakers, and yet in Finland all of that education is  done in Finnish.  And people have-- studies have found that, in Finland, kids are much better equipped  to be able to learn a second language, and to go into higher education and gather all  of these like technical studies, because all of their education is done in Finnish.  And over at IAP, I was doing MISTI GTL in the Catalonia region, in Spain, and there  Catalan also has a little under 10 million speakers.  But in Catalonia all of the education is in Catalan, which made it difficult for me as  like a "Spanish speaker"-- like not even fluent, but trying to speak Spanish speaker-- to be  able to teach the students.  But they had such a better experience with all of their textbooks in Catalan all of their  computer software.  So I was trying to teach them Inkscape and Gimp, but everything was is (CHUCKLING) Catalan,  and I just couldn't understand like even how to open a window.  So they taught me a lot about this.  And they-- all of them speak Catalan, and Spanish, and English, and then they can like  learn German or French on the side, as well.  So all of them, because their initial education K through 12 and then higher education, if  they want it to be, is in Catalan, then they can learn all of these other things just as  well as we do like in English, which is mostly our one and kind of only language in the United  States.  Yeah.  So that was my experience.  And what-- a school that is like a really good model in Haiti is the LKM School.  I didn't know how to pronounce it in Kreyol, so it's LKM.  It's a K through 10 school in a rural part on an island of Haiti, and their education  is starting to be in this model of all Kreyol education, trying to teach all of these subjects,  all of the technical terms in Kreyol.  And the students are learning much better than the rest of the students in Haiti, who's  schooling is French and who only 10% graduate from high school.  So the linguistic apartheid part of this is that, when you teach somebody in a language  they don't understand, you prevent them from being able to move into different socioeconomic  classes to attain the education and the success that they should be able to.  And this all leads to the MIT Haiti initiative that Michel started here between MIT and all  the Haitian education systems.  So a couple of their main points are to teach educators in Haiti that teaching in Kreyol  is perfectly fine, that it is actually better for the students, that it gives them more  opportunities, and that STEM and technical subjects can be taught in Kreyol.  So a lot of the worries or concerns are that like Kreyol doesn't have words for these languages.  We didn't have words for a computer either up until when they were created.  A lot of other languages borrow words from other languages.  So I learned Japanese, and in Japanese there's this lovely thing called Katakana  where you just grab words from other languages.  So if you don't know how to pronounce it, you kind of like make it sound like it, and  oftentimes, it is what has been borrowed.  So for example, bread is pan, from German.  And all of these other languages have words borrowed from other languages, and that's  what globalization does.  So the same thing should be able to happen with Kreyol and STEM learning.  And the really good results of this are that they affirm students' cultures and backgrounds,  and their own upbringings, and how the society actually works, as opposed to a colonial oppressive  society.  And it equalizes students being able to have more social mobility, and to attain what they  want and what they should be able to.  GUEST SPEAKER: So to kind of tie this back to what we can do to stay woke, with regards  to literacy, I think it's important to remember that, "language is a mediating force of knowledge,  but it is also knowledge itself."  And so one approach is for groups to kind of come together and create a language that  describes their experience amongst themselves, and then to share that language and to share  that experience in their own language.  And I think that that is one way that we can start breaking away from the kind of putting  standard English on a pedestal, and can also kind of validate other discourses, and other  ways of being, and of other just languages that kind of already exist in the US and across  the world.  Questions?  How have our understandings of literacy evolved in response to the internet, unprecedented  global integration, and increased pressure to preserve human rights?  For example, what does it mean that schools repress the development of subjectivity, but  do largely ensure literacy?  How can modern notions of literacy evolve to address the phenomena, such as the proliferation  of fake news?  So if we're moving past literacy as just the idea of being able to read, and we are entering  this new kind of this new wave being defiantly pushed by the internet and the influence of  technology on the way we live, literacy is coming to be a more critical approach to life  in the sense that fake news is a thing, you know, and it's actually quite hard to distinguish  what news is really what news is fake.  And the ability to do that, having that critical lens, is maybe the next evolution of literacy.  So any ideas on that, I guess, is the question.  AUDIENCE: So I'm just gonna answer the first part of this, because I'm not sure if I have  an answer for the next two.  But something that I think is kind of hilarious about like the integration of the internet  is that I think it's simultaneously making us more literate and less literate.  So like-- or like pressuring you to be more literate.  So "pressuring" you to be more literate is like, now there's a bunch of sources that  you can read, and like now you can be more educated, it's all open to the public if you  have a computer.  And then there's also like the pressure to speak English properly, based off either,  you know, like there's one viral video, this old grandma screaming at this Hispanic woman  in IHOP because she was paying in Spanish, or something like that.  So like it puts pressure on you to speak English correctly, and then meanwhile, because of  like things like Facebook and like any social media, people like don't speak English correctly,  like typing, you know, abbreviations and stuff that's acceptable in text, but like meanwhile  we're saying you should speak English properly.  So it's kind of a weird dichotomy.  GUEST SPEAKER: I'm interested in the age implications of what you just said, kind of aligning--  kind of a critique towards the use of different varieties of English with older generations  and the use of nonstandard varieties of English with younger generations.  I'm interested in that.  AUDIENCE: Yeah, I think-- I mean, I guess like-- so like there's a grandma that I know  that's on Facebook, and like she makes sure to type everything out, including punctuation.  And like her Facebook posts are longer and they're more like here's a card, that type  of thing.  Whereas like my Facebook, A, I'm just sharing things, but B, if I write anything, it's probably  not good, proper English.  So I think it does depend on your age group, but also like going back to the original point  of, you know, that grandma screaming at the Hispanic woman in IHOP, like it's not just  like an older woman screaming because, you know, she's more literate.  Like there's also like kids who think like, oh, you have to speak English in here.  So like there is still that weirdness between like how older people act on Facebook, and  stuff like that.  But I still think like the point of, you know, pressuring people is regardless of age.  AUDIENCE: I think because we're gonna be talking about language, which is dialect in this class,  I would kind of risk saying that we're kind of creating a new language because of the  internet with like all the abbreviations and things.  And there's the way-- the push for speed and everything like that.  So I think the reason that older generations don't use it as much is because they're not  used to it, and they're in a different frame of reference and they just haven't learned  this new dialect that we're starting to use.  So I think that it's a good thing, in a sense, but a lot of people who want that standard  American English are going to be pushing us to go back to that, as opposed to using the  internet language.  But going as far as our changes in literacy because of the internet, like I didn't know  that The Onion was satire, at first.  Well, I just didn't know that The Onion existed.  And then when I saw that, I realized that that was satire.  I think that nuance like that is something that you miss especially with the internet,  because you can't really express sarcasm very clearly over just plain text.  And I think that's something that we're like struggling with, because of the internet.  AUDIENCE: But I think that you said-- you talked about The Onion.  I think that shows like Stephen Colbert or the Colbert Report, and shows like that, show  that we have been dealing with that sort of satire language issue.  Because for a long time, people [inaudible] the Colbert Report didn't realize that it was satire.  So I think that we've done this before, and it's sort of a different cycle.  But now it's on the net instead of being TV.  AUDIENCE: I wanted to bounce off what you originally said.  Like with like it's not a bad thing that we're checking the language, I agree with this  It's kind of like [inaudible], as you mentioned.  Do you think like there are certain rules, like the way we type, and like is there like  a way to be literate like with our new abbreviations?  AUDIENCE: I think there definitely is.  Like for instance, punctuating sentences with like LOL or ha ha.  Like the beginning of the end, where you put that.  Using emojis to get more emotion in it.  Like there's definitely like a science to it that we kind of fell into, but didn't realize  was [inaudible].  AUDIENCE: Yeah. OK, cool. This is interesting.  GUEST SPEAKER: My question is, so knowing now that people grow up in the type of literacy,  whether it's traditional or emancipatory, what are the pros and cons of your type of  literacy?  And explain why we should move ether towards or away from an emancipatory literacy.  AUDIENCE: I think you all gave some really great points towards moving to emancipatory  literacy.  I mean, if it's helping people learn, I don't see a down fall, especially because it's kind  of broadening their world view.  A couple of presentations ago, there were other students who were playing jeopardy with  AAE, and that was kind of like broadening their worldview.  Like even if you went to the school and didn't speak AAE you were learning about a new language  that you weren't familiar with.  And so they were able to do this through the emancipatory sort literacy.  MICHEL DEGRAFF: What's AAE?  AUDIENCE: Oh, African American English. Sorry. Not AAPE.  AUDIENCE: So kind of just playing devil's advocate a little bit, I think-- I guess one  of the dangers of emancipatory literacy might be kind of this non-standardization like with  issues like Common Core and things like that.  We kind of have an educational system that's set up so that everybody's kind of put on  the same level, to some extent.  Like everybody has that same kind of baseline education.  But like with emancipatory literacy, I think you're going to find educational programs  are more geared towards a specific like cultural norms and things of that nature related to  whatever population it targets.  So I wonder if that could potentially produce a system in which certain students, even though  they're receiving an education that is geared towards them, it's objectively not that same  quality of student who are receiving more of a traditional literacy approach.  I'm just putting it out there.  GUEST SPEAKER: I want to push back on that just a little bit, because I think that the  standardized approach to education is the approach that's been taken with, you know,  teach for a test approach, and it's failed.  It's been failing for a while now, and I think that a lot of people in education policy and  even just teachers are recognizing that now.  And I think that education-- emancipatory literacy gives us an interesting lens to think  about how to educate people so that they can learn.  And I think maybe another place you can start kind of investing energy is thinking of ways  in society that we can value those different ways of knowing and being and learning, so  that it's not just, you went to college, so you deserve to be paid a lot of money kind  of thing, and it's a, oh you can build a table from scratch.  How do you get paid to do that?  AUDIENCE: Where do you think MIT falls on the spectrum of like emancipatory literacy?  [laughing]  GUEST SPEAKER: I think MIT is way far on the tradition.  MIT is the Alt right of traditional literacy, I think.  [laughing] I just think that there are-- I think that the immense pressure that falls  on students, just on students physical bodies, is definitely a symptom of a larger problem.  And for me, the fact that that symptom is not enough of an impetus to change, is heartbreaking.  Because I think that-- I didn't come to college expecting it to be the best four years of  my life, but I didn't come here also expecting to just suffer.  [laughing] And so I think that there's definitely got to be a way where I can bloom, can reach  my best potential.  And I love learning.  I love-- like I love school, you know, and the fact that I have just kept running up  against the institution, I think, as a creative person, has made me kind of step back and  think again about emancipatory literacy and how I can do that after.  MICHEL DEGRAFF: So I have a question for you, Cynthia.  So given what you just said, how would you-- so if you were to be MIT's president, what  would you change?  What-- how would you make it better more emancipatory?  Keeping in mind that there are certain goals that you have to reach in terms of, say, chemical  engineering, if you're a chemist, how would you do that?  How would you advise administration be better on that score?  CYNTHIA: I think very first thing I would do is have people who are more interested  in research not be professors.  So the ones who are interested in research should be doing research full time, and the  people who are interested in teaching should teach.  Because I think that that gives like-- that gives people more impetus just to connect  with their students and actually get to know them, and I think in that kind of environment,  you would foster like a safer, healthier environment for learning.  Whereas if you have a professor who is more interested in winning the Nobel Prize, like  what are you-- what do you do coming up against that?  I also would have MIT think very, very hard about where the funding is coming from?  What it's going to?  And how that kind of fits in the global system, where MIT as an institution fits into the  global system, as kind of not only an institution that does propel you to a higher class, but  kind of does that at the expense of a lot of other people and systems across the globe  even if it's not directly in the area.  So I think that being more critical and intentional about our values, and also maybe adding soul  to the end of that-- end of the that motto.  But--  MICHEL DEGRAFF: OK, OK.  CYNTHIA: Yeah.  MICHEL DEGRAFF: Thank you. I think we should move to the third question.  Thank you.  AUDIENCE: The last question is, from your personal experiences, or what you've seen  or read about, how do you think we can improve students' experiences and confidence through  intentional language use in schools?  Like what mottoes do you think are working, or would work?  MICHEL DEGRAFF: Go ahead Colin.  AUDIENCE: So bouncing of that it seems we get to [inaudible] thing where it [inaudible]  is inculcated in this standard curriculum.  It goes into society and then perpetuates the standard curriculum back on the Indian  students.  So I'm curious about if anyone has thoughts how you could make knowledge about-- because  one of the main hurdles is people instituting, or interrogating the standard curriculum is  just strictly about how the story of America's history has been with regarding the Native  American genocide, slavery, and, for lack of a better word, mean that it is manifest destiny.  How do you make people aware of that on a level that they can see those things playing  out today, then work to interrogate that curriculum?  Especially if they are coming from a background where race isn't talked about in this family  because it's an uncomfortable topic, or if they just haven't heard about these things  necessarily because of school.  AUDIENCE: For me, I feel like it's more about where do you learn to interrogate your own  beliefs, and I feel like that's hard to find.  And I came to-- this class was a huge part of that for me.  And I don't know if that because I started out, or if I just happened to stumble upon  a place where I learned to interrogate my own beliefs.  But I think this isn't a point to make for themselves, but I don't really have an answer  for how we get triple the value in evaluating in interrogating your own beliefs, or how  much more in [inaudible] learn to interrogate your own beliefs before attacking someone else's.  AUDIENCE: Yeah, bouncing off of I think a common theme that we come up in this class  is how do we have conversations with people who don't want to these conversations?  And I think the only way for them to figure it out is for them to interrogate themselves,  but most of those people won't.  So finding ways to make them interrogate themselves, I think is gonna be a common problem throughout  history.  And unfortunately I don't know I, personally, have a great solution for that.  But I think more opportunities like this-- I mean obviously you mentioned this before,  the people who are taking this class, were not really diversified at all right?  We all sought this class out mostly, so I don't know how you can get someone who doesn't  want interrogate themselves in to a situation like this.  So maybe mandating something like this where you have to go a black history class, or a  Native American history class, or whatever might force people to start talking about  it.  The history will speak for itself.  I think that history is-- if you know the full history of the United States for example--  it's pretty terrible and I think that you do need to know the whole history, and also  need to get the alternative sides and have those be integrated into the curriculum.  I also was interested in thinking about entry points into these conversations, and ways  that our humor can function as entry points in these conversations.  I've been having this conversation with a friend of mine of how humor, for example,  gives us a way to kind of express some of these things that are more taboo, and kind  of laugh them off, and kind of integrate them, as opposed to everyone shunning them and people  feeling bottled.  So I am interested about humor and art specifically as entry point into these conversations.  MICHEL DEGRAFF: [inaudible].  So Dana, I think what you say in a way answers the concern that Shope expressed right?  Because Shope put it as dual choice.  That you either do this or you do that, right?  So Dana is right, right Shope,?  One can imagine having in the class-- the principle math class, chemistry class-- paying  attention to those issues.  In fact there room for that, even if you take a simple photography class one can even think  about what kind of choices go into making your camera?  And actually, I have friends who are photographers and they explain to me that actually most  cameras were not geared to take pictures of black people.  So even as a white photographer he finds that when he takes a picture with his regular Cannon  of a white person it comes much better than when takes it of a black person.  Why? Because the lenses are designed with a normal gaze of the white subject right?  So he had to tweak his camera to make it take good pictures of black people.  So even there, even in physics there's a way to interrogate the curriculum.  Why selections are made with the lens for example?  So in a way it could both, you could both have the necessary interest in human beings  the quote unquote more "traditional curriculum".  And going back to the other point, can you imagine also in history, in biology, biology  could include text like I mentioned earlier, The Mismeasure of Man if you wish, goes into  lots of integral issues about biology.  About how we make-- heads were measured to show that humans are as intelligent.  At Harvard for example, for many years when you were coming in you had to undress and  they took your picture naked, and they would at your picture to decide what kind of students  you would become based on physical traits, like because your head.  This was Harvard.  I guess this was one proponent of what was called then phrenology.  Which is the measure of--  So there is plenty, plenty of room to integrate those kind intricacies within traditional  curriculum.  OK, so thank you very much.  [applause] 