 The following content is provided under a Creative  Commons license.  Your support will help MIT OpenCourseWare  continue to offer high quality educational resources for free.  To make a donation or view additional materials  from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT OpenCourseWare  at ocw.mit.edu.  BOGDAN FEDELES: Hello and welcome to 5.07  Biochemistry online.  I'm Dr. Bogdan Fedeles.  This video is about pyridoxal 5 phosphate, or PLP,  an essential metabolism cofactor derived from vitamin B6.  All animals are auxotrophic for PLP,  meaning they need to supplement their diet with vitamin B6  in order to survive.  PLP is one of the most ancient cofactors,  and surprisingly, it can catalyze  chemical transformation, such as a transamination  even without an enzyme.  PLP is actually involved in a staggering number  of biochemical transformations.  This video summarizes the most important reactions involving  PLP that you will see in 5.07, and will also  show you how to write the complete curved arrow  mechanisms for these transformations.  Let's talk about PLP-catalyzed reactions.  As we just mentioned, PLP is the cofactor  derived from vitamin B6.  This cofactor is very important for a number of reactions.  In this course, we're going to look particularly  at the transamination reaction.  This is a crucial reaction for the metabolism of all amino  the acids, and we're also going to encounter this reaction when  we replenish the intermediates in the TCA cycle, what  we call anaplerotic reactions.  And we're also going to see PLP involved in reactions  in the malate-aspartate shuttle that transfers redox  equivalents, reducing equivalents,  between mitochondria and cytosol.  Let's take a look at the structure of vitamin B6, also  known as pyridoxine.  This is the molecule that we ingest when we get  our daily vitamin supplement.  Now in the body, this gets oxidized to form  intermediate called pyridoxal.  Notice the aldehyde group here, which  is going to be the business end of the molecule.  Now, the active co-factor, PLP--  it's actually the phosphorylated version of pyridoxal.  This requires one molecule of ATP  and the enzyme pyridoxal kinase.  And we get PLP, or pyridoxal 5 phosphate.  The name PLP comes from the initials as outlined here.  Now, this nitrogen on the pyridine ring  tends to be protonated because it's pKa,  it's close to physiological pH, between 6 and 7.  Now, for the rest of this presentation  we're going to be abbreviating this phosphate group as such,  and throughout the course.  Now, a related molecule is pyridoxamine 5 phosphate,  which we'll see, it's an intermediate  in the mechanism of PLP-catalyzed reactions.  Also known as PMP.  Now, notice the PMP has an amine group here  which replaces the aldehydic group, which is the business  end of the molecule.  Now, in all reactions with PLP, this co-factor  is actually covalently bound to the enzyme that uses it.  Typically, there's a lysine in the active site of the enzyme.  As you remember, lysine has an amine group,  and this can form a Schiff base with the aldehyde.  The reaction proceeds in two steps.  First, we form a tetrahedral intermediate.  As such.  And then, we form the Schiff's base.  So this will be the enzyme-bound PLP.  And this is where all the PLP-catalyzed reactions start.  Let's take a closer look at the transamination reaction.  Transamination reaction occurs between an amino acid  and an alpha keto acid.  We have here amino acid 1, where we highlighted the amine group,  and alpha keto acid 2.  As you can see, there's a keto group next to the carboxyl.  Now, in a transamination reaction catalyzed by PLP,  the amine group moves from the amino acid  to the keto carbon of the alpha keto acid.  And we obtain a new alpha keto acid, and a new amino acid.  So in effect, the PLP-catalyzed transamination reaction  facilitates the transfer of the amine group  from an amino acid to an alpha keto acid.  Now, this reaction actually occurs in two steps.  In the first step, the amino acid transfers the group  to the co-factor itself.  So if you remember from the previous slide,  the PMP contains an amino group, and that will actually  contain this amino group that was  taken from the amino acid 1.  Now in the second step, the PMP will transfer its amino group  to a different alpha keto acid to generate a new amino acid.  Now, there are enzymes for virtually  every single amino acid that can accomplish  this first transformation, where by using PLP,  to transfer the amine group and form an alpha keto  acid and PMP.  Now, in the second part of the reaction,  however, the alpha keto acid 2 is typically alpha keto  gluterate or oxaloacetate.  So in this case, not any alpha keto acid can function.  Alpha keto gluterate or oxaloacetate.  Now, let's take a look at an example.  For example, glutamate.  It's going to be our amino acid.  And oxaloacetate is going to be our alpha keto acid.  And in a PLP-catalyzed transformation,  we will obtain the alpha keto acid corresponding  to glutamate, which is alpha keto  glutarate, and the amino acid corresponding to oxaloacetate,  which is aspartate.  This enzyme that catalyzes this transformation  is in fact ubiquitous, and it's found  both in the liver and the muscles, and it is in fact a--  we can call it, depending and the product,  we can call it aspartate, transaminase or glutamate  oxaloacetate transaminase.  In fact, if we find this in the bloodstream,  this enzyme acts as a biomarker.  And it tells us about some damage  that might have occurred in muscle or liver, which  forced the cells to spill out their contents.  This biomarker is-- you'll often see as SGOT--  serum glutamate oxaloacetate transaminase.  And this is just one of the biomarkers that  are measured in blood tests that tells us about heart  disease or liver disease.  Let's take a look at the mechanism of the transamination  reaction.  And in particular, we're going to take a look  at part one, which as we discussed before,  the amino acid reacts with PLP to form an alpha keto  acid and PNP.  Here is our co-factor PLP, covalently bound  to the lysine in the active side of the enzyme via a Schiff's  base.  And here is our amino acid starting material.  So in the first step, the lysine that forms the Schiff base  with the co-factor is going to be replaced  by the amine functionality of the amino acid,  and it will form a new Schiff base with the co-factor.  This starts with the amine group attack on the pyridoxal carbon  to form a tetrahedral intermediate.  And following an additional proton transfer,  the lysine can be kicked off to form the new Schiff base.  So far, we have started with the Schiff's base corresponding  to the PLP bound to the enzyme and we now  obtain a co-factor forming a Schiff base  with the incoming amino acid 1.  So this portion of the mechanism is called transamination,  because we're starting with one amine  and we're forming a different amine.  Now, let's take a look at the alpha proton  attached to the alpha carbon, which  we're going to highlight here.  This proton is now in between two carbonyl-like groups.  Here is the carboxyl group and here is the Schiff base group.  So it becomes acidic enough that it  can be removed by an active side base, for example  the lysine in the active site.  This will generate a carbanium alpha carbon.  This carbanium can only form because it  is resonance stabilized.  And indeed, the PLP link system--  it's highly conjugated, and it's a good electron sink.  For this carbanium, we can write,  in fact, many different resonance structures.  Let's take a look at one of them.  This symbol denotes resonance structures.  Notice in this structure that the positive charge  on the pyrodine nitrogen is now gone,  and highlights the fact that this is a good electron sink.  And the ring now looks more like a quinone.  That's why we call this a quinoid structure,  or intermediate.  This quinoid structure shows us a glimpse into how the reaction  will proceed, because the alpha carbon now-- it's  doubly bonded to a nitrogen, which anticipates  how this alpha carbon will become a keto group  and a product of the reaction will be an alpha keto acid.  What happens?  The quinoid structure can be re-protonated,  but at a different place.  For example, on the aldehydic carbon of pyridoxal.  To highlight that these facts--  these structures are in fact resonance structures,  we're going to put them in brackets.  So let's take a look at what happened  in this past couple of steps.  So we had an alpha proton that was fairly acidic,  it was able to be removed by the active site lysine.  And then this proton came back to a different position.  So all that's happened in just a couple of steps  was a proton transfer.  Now, looking at this intermediate,  we can see that in fact the Schiff's base or the imine  of the PMP form of the co-factor and the alpha keto acid  corresponding to amino acid 1.  So via a hydrolysis reaction, these two can come apart.  So in the first step, an activated water molecule  attacks alpha carbon, forming a tetrahedral intermediate.  And one more proton transfer and we're  going to kick off the pyridoxamine form  of the co-factor.  And notice we obtain PMP and the alpha keto acid  corresponding to the amino acid 1.  This last step is, in fact, just a hydrolysis reaction  of a Schiff base.  Now, let's take a look at the second part of the PLP  transamination reaction.  The part one left us off with formation of PMP.  So in this second part, PMP will react with a new alpha keto  acid to regenerate PLP and a new amino acid.  In fact, this part of the mechanism--  it's the exact reverse of part one.  Here is PMP and our alpha keto acid.  In the first step, we're going to form--  as we've gotten used so far--  to a new imine between the keto group of alpha keto acid  and the amine group of PLP.  As usual, first we're going to get a tetrahedral intermediate.  And one more proton transfer, and we can kick off  the OH group to form the imine.  Now, this portion of the reaction  is, in fact, imine formation, which  is the reverse of the hydrolysis step that we saw in part one.  Now, as you remember, there is an active site lysine which  can act as a general base.  And it's going to de-protonate one of these two protons  on the pyridoxal ring.  The reason that we can form this carbanion  here is because this negative charge  is delocalized throughout the entire ring system.  And let's show one important resonance structure.  Which is none other than the quinoid structure  we saw before.  Just as before, the protonated lysine  can now donate proton on a different position.  For example, the alpha carbon of the alpha keto acid.  As you can see here, now the proton  is on the alpha position.  And now where this starts to look more  like the Schiff's base formed by an amino acid  with the PLP version of the co-factor.  So from here on onwards, we're just  going to substitute the PLP--  the amino acid bound to the PLP--  with the active site lysine in the transimination reaction  that we saw before.  So first, the lysine can attack this carbon,  forming a tetrahedral intermediate.  And then, following some proton transfer,  we can kick off the amino acid and generate the Schiff's base  corresponding to the PLP co-factor bound to the enzyme.  So here we have PLP, enzyme bound,  and the new amino acid 2.  We mentioned PLP is a very versatile co-factor,  so let's take a look what other reactions  besides transamination can PLP catalyze.  One interesting reaction, used especially by bacteria,  is a racemization.  This involves taking an L amino acid, for example L alanine,  and converting it via a PLP-catalyzed reaction to D  alanine.  This is an important reaction for bacteria,  because they incorporate the alanine into the cell  walls, which make it very hard to recognize  by the immune system, and makes it very hard  to digest by the host proteases.  Let's take a look at a key intermediate  in the PLP-catalyzed reaction.  As before, L alanine is going to react  with the PLP bound to the enzyme,  and it's going to form an amine.  Here we're highlighting the stereochemistry  of the alpha hydrogen. And here is our active site lysine.  As we've seen before, this alpha hydrogen  is acidic enough that it can be removed by the lysine.  And it's going to form a carbanion at this position.  Now, this carbanion, as we've seen before,  is able to form because the charge is, in fact, delocalized  through the entire system of the pyridoxal ring.  So for this structure, we can write  a number of resonance structures, which we're not  going to mention here.  Now, this carbanion can be re-protonated.  And here we had a--  the hydrogen was pointing up on the top  of the plane of the page, but we can re-protonate it  from the bottom, and that will change the stereochemistry  of this carbon.  See if that re-protonation happens from the bottom,  we will obtain the Schiff base corresponding to the D alanine.  So by being able to generate this carbanion  at the alpha position, the PLP reaction and co-factor  allows the inversion of the configuration  and the alpha carbon, converting L alanine to D alanine.  Now, another interesting reaction that requires PLP  is de-carboxylation.  Here we're looking at an amino acid-- for example, glutamate.  In a PLP-catalyzed reaction, you can lose this CO2 group  and form this molecule, which is called gamma aminobutyric acid,  or GABA.  This is, in fact, a very important neurotransmitter  and inhibitor, a neurotransmitter  that is required in the brain.  Let's take a look how this de-carboxylation  is catalyzed by PLP.  As always, have we seen so far, the glutamate  will react with PLP bound in the active site of the enzyme,  to form a Schiff base.  Here is the Schiff base.  Like that.  Now instead of de-protonating at the alpha position,  the CO2 is activated to leave.  Because it will leave behind the carbanion.  Such as that.  And as we've seen before, a carbanion  formed at this position can de-localize  throughout the entire pyridoxal ring,  and therefore it stabilize and it can exist long enough.  And we're not going to draw, but there--  you can imagine, there are a number of different resonance  structures.  Now, this carbanion-- it gets protonated quickly  by a general acid, and will generate this structure, which  is just a Schiff base corresponding to gamma  aminobutyric acid with PLP.  And now, from here, a transimination  where the active site lysine will remove the PLP  and free up the GABA products of the reaction.  In this video we talked about PLP-catalyzed reactions.  PLP is the co-factor that comes from vitamin B6.  Here's vitamin B6, what we call pyridoxine,  which is the molecule that we find in our vitamin pills.  Now, in the body, pyridoxine formed  pyridoxal, which is activated to form pyridoxal 5 phosphate,  or PLP.  And typically when it reacts, PLP  is found as a Schiff's base bound in the active site  via a lysine.  PLP is very important for transamination reactions,  which are essential for the metabolism of all amino acids.  We have seen the transamination reaction where an amino acid  1 reacts with alpha keto acid 2 and the PLP catalyzed reaction  forms an alpha keto acid 1 and amino acid 2,  essentially transferring the group--  the amino group from the amino acid to the alpha keto acid.  The reaction occurs in two steps,  where first the amino acid is transferred to PLP to form PMP.  Then PMP then transfers this group--  the amino group-- back to a alpha keto acid  to generate a new amino acid.  As we saw, the mechanism of transamination  involves multiple steps.  The first step is a transimination reaction  where the Schiff's base that's formed between the active site  lysine and the PLP becomes a Schiff's  base between the incoming amino acid and PLP.  Next, we have a proton transfer, which  is allowed by the ability of the PLP ring  to stabilize a negative charge, and move  the proton from the alpha position  to somewhere on the PLP ring via a quinoid structure.  And finally, that the resulting Schiff base  is hydrolyzed to generate PMP and an alpha keto acid.  In the second part of the reaction,  PMP now reacts with alpha keto acid to form a new Schiff base,  and then the proton transfer happens in reverse, via, again,  a quinoid structure, to generate the Schiff base  corresponding to the PLP and the new amino acid 2.  Which, via a transamination reaction  will generate amino acid 2 and the PLP enzyme bound.  Finally, we mentioned that PLP is very versatile,  and it can catalyze other reactions,  such as racemization, for example,  switching the configuration of the alpha carbon from L  alanine to D alanine, or de-carboxylation, generating  alpha aminobutyric acid, or GABA,  an important neurotransmitter from glutamate. 