 The following content is provided under a Creative  Commons license.  Your support will help MIT OpenCourseWare  continue to offer high quality educational resources for free.  To make a donation or view additional materials  from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT OpenCourseWare  at ocw.mit.edu.  BOGDAN FEDELES: Greetings, and welcome to 5.07  Biochemistry online.  I'm Dr. Bogdan Fedeles.  Let's metabolize some problems.  Today we're going to be talking about problem one of problem  set seven.  Now this is a problem we are chasing labels  through biochemical pathways.  Although it sounds funny, it's actually  one of the established ways through which we  can test whether the mechanism we propose for these pathways  is in fact consistent with what we observe inside the cells.  In part a of this problem, we're going  to be looking at glycogen, and try to figure out  which carbon's in glycogen end up being  lost as CO2 in the pyruvate dehydrogenase  step of the metabolism.  Here is a shorthand representation  of glycogen. As you know glycogen is a polymer formed  of glucose monomers.  Here is a cyclic form of glucose,  and in glycogen we have these one four linkages as  shown here.  Occasionally we'll have one six linkages,  as in the case for branches.  But for simplicity we're not going to represent them here.  Now we want to figure out which one of these  carbons in glycogen--  we can label them starting from here.  One, two, three, four, five, and six.  Which one of these carbons is going  to be lost as CO2 in the pyruvate dehydrogenase step.  Now let's take a look at the pyruvate dehydrogenase  reaction.  As you remember, one of the endings of glycolysis  is the pyruvate dehydrogenase reaction,  in which pyruvate loses a CO2 molecule and forms acetyl  CoA which later can enter the TCA cycle.  Now this carbon in the carboxyl or group of pyruvate--  I'm going to label with a red dot.  This is the carbon that is being lost as CO2.  So we want to find out which of the carbons in our glycogen  molecule ends up being this red dotted carbon that's  being lost as CO2.  To figure this out we have to backtrack from pyruvate  all the way to the beginning of glycolysis  to figure out where this carbon is coming from.  Shown here is a layout of the entire glycolysis pathways  starting from glycogen. Let me walk you through it  very quickly.  Glycogen, shown here-- we've shown only a couple  of monomers attached to the glycogen and protein.  It's going to get hydrolyzed by glycogen-phosphorylase  to form glucose-1-phosphate, which then mutates to glucose  6-phosphate shown here.  And then becomes fructose-6-phosphate,  fructose 1,6-bisphosphate.  Then the aldolase reaction splits it  into dihydroxyacetone-phosphate and glycerol-dihy-3phosphate,  or GAP.  Then the gap dehydrogenase converts it  to 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate.  And then it would go down, 3-phosphoglycerate,  2-phosphoglycerate, phosphopyruvate, and finally,  pyruvate.  And here, I've also written the pyruvate dehydrogenase  reaction.  Pyruvate becomes acetyl-CoA by losing the CO2.  Once again, this carbon that's lost, the CO2,  is the carbon that we want to track.  So we're going to put a red dot on it.  And as we just said, this carbon is the carboxyl group  in the pyruvate.  So the way to solve this problem is basically go backward  through the pathway and figure out  where this carbon is coming from in the original glycogen  molecule.  For these couple of steps, it's pretty clear.  It's going to be the carboxyl in each one of these molecules all  the way to 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate right  there.  So now this 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate is  coming from GAP.  So this carbon is, in fact, the aldehyde carbon in GAP.  Now, as you guys know, trios isomerase interconverts  between dihydroxyacetone phosphate and GAP.  So this carbon in dihydroxyacetone phosphate  is actually this carbon.  Because the phosphate group is going to stay unchanged,  and then the carbonyl group at C2  can interconvert with C1 to form an aldehyde here.  So any of these two carbons, if they were labeled,  they would end up being lost as CO2  in the pyruvate dehydrogenase step.  Now, if we go backwards in the aldolase reaction,  GAP and DHAP, when put together, these carbons  are going to be carbons 3 and 4.  So counting here, 1, 2, 3.  This is a carbon that comes from dihyrdoxyacetone phosphate.  And this is the carbon that comes  from GAP, so carbons 3 and 4.  And obviously, they're going to be staying carbons 3  and 4 all the way back to glucose, 1, 2, 3, and 4  right there.  And also in glucose, 1 phosphate,  and consequently in glycogen as well.  So to answer part one, we can now  write here that carbons 3 and 4 of glycogen  are going to be lost at the pyruvate dehydrogenase  step as carbon dioxide.  Part B of the problem deals with the metabolism of glycerol.  As you know, glycerol is formed by the hydrolysis  of triacylglycerides.  Now, we are asked to trace a label  from the C2 carbon of glycerol all the way  to the first step, in which this carbon is last  as carbon dioxide.  Let's first take a look at the metabolism of glycerol.  As I've shown here, triacylglycerides  can be hydrolyzed to form glycerol,  which is 1, 2, 3 propane triol.  Now, as you know, glycerol is metabolized in two steps.  First, we have a glycerol kinase that's  going to form a glycerol 3-phosphate, as shown here.  And then, we're going to use a dehydrogenase that  uses NAD to oxidize the second carbon of glycerol  to dihydroxyacetone phosphate.  Then it can enter glycolysis very conveniently right here.  And then it's going to continue getting  metabolized towards pyruvate and acetyl-CoA,  as we've seen before.  Now, the second carbon in glycerol is C2 right here.  I'm going to mark it with a blue square.  So this carbon is right here, and it's  going to end up right there.  Now, this second carbon in dihydroxyacetone phosphate  is going to be the second carbon in GAP  and then second carbon here, here, here.  Isn't this fun?  Then the second carbon in pyruvate.  Now, once the pyruvate decarboxylates,  then it's going to be the carbonyl of acetyl-CoA.  It's this carbon right here.  Now, so far, this carbon has followed the metabolic pathway,  but it has not left yet as CO2.  Now, what happens to acetyl-CoA?  It's going to enter the TCA cycle.  Now let's take a look at the TCA cycle.  As we just said, we're looking now  at the carbon, the first carbon in acetyl-CoA  here, the carbon that has the carbonyl group on.  So as I've shown here in the to TCA cycle,  the two carbons in acetyl-CoA are marked with this red line.  And they will enter and combine as oxaloacetate  to form citrate.  Then citrate isomerizes to isocitrate.  Then we're going to lose a CO2 molecule, which  is this middle guy, to form alpha-ketoglutarate.  But notice, the two carbons from acetyl-CoA  are still in the molecule.  Then we're going to lose another CO2 with this bottom one  to form succinyl-CoA.  But once again, the two carbons that came from acetyl-CoA  are still here.  So in the first TCA cycle, none of these CO2  will contain the label that came from the glycerol.  Now, as we go through the TCA cycle,  we reach this step where it's succinate.  Now here, I stopped putting this red mark,  because succinate is a symmetric molecule.  So therefore, if these two carbons  were coming from acetyl-CoA, at this point they will scramble.  So we won't be able to tell whether it's these two  carbons or these two carbons.  Now, let me backtrack and put in the labels.  So acetyl-CoA, we have this carbon  came from the C2 of glycerol.  So we'll find it in this carbon, this carbon, this carbon,  this carbon.  Now, we get to the succinate step,  and we said, well, it was here.  This would be the carbon that corresponds to succinyl-CoA.  But because this molecule's symmetric,  by the time we get to the malate step  to add this hydroxyl group, it's going to be to the carbon  next to the label or the carbon further from the label.  Now, because the molecule is symmetric, we can't--  the fumarase enzyme cannot tell which carbon was labeled  and which wasn't.  Therefore, malate is going to be--  half of the molecules is going to have  the label on this carbon, and half  is going to have the label on this carbon.  So I'm going to write like 1/2 square and 1/2 square.  Similarly, when we get to oxaloacetate,  the label is distributed 1/2 on one carboxyl group,  and the other 1/2 is going to be on the other carboxyl group.  So we've gone through the TCA cycle once,  and we have not lost the carbon that came from the glycerol.  But look what happens when we continue the TCA  cycle a second time.  So now let's say we combine with an acetyl-CoA that  doesn't have any label at all.  Now, these two carboxyl groups are  going to be these two carboxyl groups in citrate.  And as we discussed, both of these two groups  are going to be lost as CO2 in these two steps.  First is the middle carboxyl group that's being lost here.  And this other carboxyl is going to be  lost at the alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase step.  So the second time we go through the TCA cycle,  we lose half of the label at the isocitrate dehydrogenase step  and half of the label at the alpha-ketoglutarate  dehydrogenase step.  So I'm going to circle these.  So to answer part B, the C2 carbon of glycerol  is going to be lost as CO2 in the TCA cycle.  But we have to go once through the cycle first, through which  none of the label will be lost.  And then the second time, first in  the isocitrate dehydrogenase, then  at the alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase,  we're going to be losing the CO2 that came  from the C2 carbon of glycerol.  As you might imagine, glycerol can also  be used to produce energy.  In fact, some bacteria can grow on glycerol  using no other carbon source.  Now, in part C of the problem, we're  going to explore how much energy we can get  from one molecule of glycerol.  Let's first review the metabolism of glycerol.  As we just discussed, glycerol enters metabolism  with glycerol kinase, which then in two steps  becomes dihydroxyacetone phosphate, which  can enter glycolysis all the way to pyruvate,  and then acetyl-CoA.  Here, the pyruvate dehydrogenase allows us to lose one CO2,  and then acetyl-CoA will enter the TCA  cycle, where within one cycle, we're  going to lose two more CO2s.  So that's a total of three carbons that we lose.  And that's exactly how many carbons  we have in the glycerol.  Now, what we need to keep track in order  to evaluate how much energy we get  from one molecule of glycerol is, whenever we need to,  use ATP.  For example, we need to put in energy,  or whenever we generate NADH or FADH2 molecules,  then we can then take to the electron transport chain  and generate ATPs out of them.  So I've put together a list of the steps in the pathway  where the energy balance is affected,  either we need to use energy or we are generating energy  in the form or ATP or in the form of redox cofactors,  such as NAD and FAD.  So the first step, glycerol kinase,  we're going to need to spend one molecule of ATP.  So I'm going to put a minus 1 here for ATP equivalents.  Now, in the glycerol 3-phosphate dehydrogenase step,  which is shown right here, we are generating  one molecule of NADH.  So plus 1 NADH.  Now, for the purpose of this problem,  we're going to use the convention the 1 NADH is  worth about 3 ATP equivalents.  Now, later on in the pathway, we're  going to get to the GAPDH step where we generate one more NADH  molecule.  So GAPDH, another NADH molecule.  That's equivalent to 3 ATPs.  So moving ahead, we have the phosphoglycerate kinase step,  where we generate 1 ATP, and then we  have the pyruvate kinase step where we generate 1 more ATP.  I have these written here.  So plus 1 ATP, and plus 1 ATP.  Now, finally, we know that pyruvate, it's  going to be decarboxylated by the pyruvate dehydrogenase,  and here, too, we're generating 1 NADH.  So plus 1 NADH, that's going to be equivalent to 3 ATPs.  And finally, the TCA cycle.  Now, we have one molecule of acetyl-CoA  that enters the TCA cycle.  As you guys know for every molecule of acetyl-CoA that  enters the TCA cycle, we're going  to be generating 1, 2, 3 NADHs.  1 FADH2, and 1 GTP.  So the tally is 3 NADH, 1 FADH2, and 1 GDP.  Now, GDP is equivalent to an ATP.  FADH2 counts as 2 ATPs, and NADH counts as 3 ATPs.  So that's a grand total of 12 ATPs.  So putting all of this together from one  molecule of glycerol, when fully metabolized to CO2,  we get 22 ATP equivalents.  So that's the final answer for part  C. From one molecule of glycerol,  we get about 22 ATP equivalents.  In part D of the problem, we're tracing the same labels  we had in part A, but instead of tracing them to CO2,  we're going to trace them to the amino acid alanine.  As you know, one way to produce alanine  is by transamination from pyruvate.  Since we already tracked the label to pyrate,  we need to know how do we convert pyruvate into alanine.  Let's take a look at that reaction.  As you know, alpha-keto acids, such as pyruvate,  can be converted into amino acids  by a transamination reaction.  Here, we're going to use another amino acid  to donate the amino group to the alpha-keto acid pyruvate  to form alanine.  Now, all these transamination reactions  are catalyzed by PLP or pyridoxal 5-phosphate, which  is a cofactor derived from vitamin B6.  So when it's left to right, in this transformation  is the other pair of amino acid--  alpha-keto acid.  So basically, where is this amino group coming from?  Typically for most transaminases the other pair  is glutamate alpha-ketoglutarate.  So I'm going to have glutamate is going  to donate the amino group, and in the process is  going to become an alpha-keto acid alpha-ketoglutarate.  So in this way, pyruvate becomes alanine.  Now, we were tracking the label from this carbon, so the carbon  that will be lost as CO2 in the pyruvate dehydrogenase  reaction.  So that is this carbon right here in pyruvate.  So in the transamination reaction,  this carbon becomes the carboxyl carbon of alanine.  So if you were to start with a glycogen that  was labeled at the 3 or 4--  the carbons 3 and 4, that label would  be lost as CO2 in the pyruvate dehydrogenase reaction  that we saw in part A. But also, that label  would be incorporated in alanine at the carboxyl group  of this amino acid.  Parts E and F of the problem deal  with tracing labels to the amino acids glutamate and aspartate.  Now, both of these amino acids have  their corresponding alpha-keto acids as part of the TCA cycle.  So let's first take a look at this TCA cycle.  Here, we have the TCA cycle where  I highlighted alpha-ketoglutarate going  into glutamate through a transamination reaction.  Alpha-ketoglutarate and alpha-keto acid  can undergo a PLP-catalyzed transamination  to form glutamate.  And similarly, oxaloacetate, another alpha-keto acid  can transaminate to form aspartate.  Now, in part B of the problem, we  were looking at the label present  at carbon 1 in acetyl-CoA.  And we said that this label will stay  inside the intermediates of the TCA cycle for the whole round.  Now, when this label gets the alpha-ketoglutarate,  it's going to be on this carboxyl group.  So in the transamination reaction,  the label is going to end completely  on the furthermost carboxyl in glutamate.  So that takes care of part E.  Now, if we continue chasing this label,  once we get to the succinate, the label is going to split  half and half between these two carboxyl groups,  because we cannot tell which one--  because the molecule is going to be symmetric.  Similarly, for fumarate and in malate as well.  So in oxaloacetate, the label is going  to be on both of the carboxyl group.  Half of the molecules will have it one.  Half of the molecules will have it on the other.  So therefore, the aspartate is going  to mirror that label distribution, 1/2 label on one  carboxyl, 1/2 label on the other carboxyl.  So that should answer the final part of this problem.  Now, I hope this problem gave you  a better understanding of what it means to chase labels  through biochemical pathways, and also that chasing labels  can help us better understand the mechanisms  of biochemical transformations. 