 And now I'm in position to talk about what  is the maximum force.  If I push F harder, as if I push F and the blocks go together,  the accelerations are the same.  I push F harder.  Accelerations are the same.  I push F harder, and I push F so hard,  that the static friction no longer reaches  its maximum value.  And if I push F harder than that,  I will not have-- the static friction  can't get bigger, and the blocks 1 and 2 will start  to slip relative to each other.  So my no slipping condition is that I want two things.  a1 equals a2.  We'll call that a.  And the maximum force condition is that F static  is equal to maximum value.  Now, what is the normal force between that we refer to  in our fiction law?  There's two normal forces-- the ground  and the normal force between the surfaces.  But the static friction that we're talking about  is between the surfaces.  So that's why we use N here and not N ground.  And now I can solve for this F max.  By the way, we also have the condition that fk is mu k.  What normal force are we talking about?  N, which we've called N ground 1.  And now I look at my equations, and my goal  is to solve for F. I know Ng1 from this equation.  It's just equal to M1g plus N. I Know N from that equation.  So Ng1 is just the sum of the masses times g.  So I know this.  I have f, which is m2a.  And I can now apply my result.  So what we'll do is we'll solve for the a's, a1 equals a2,  in terms of F max.  So over here we have that a is f over m2.  That's from this equation.  And now I'll substitute a1 is equal to that.  I'll substitute that there.  And I get that F Max is going to be  equal to fk plus f static max.  That's that one.  Plus m1 times a1, which is f static max divided by m2.  And so I get that F max equals-- now  I'm going to substitute in all of these values.  It's going to look a little complicated.  And so I'd like to have a little space here for that,  to get everything in here.  And we'll see that it's equal to mu k m1 plus m2g, fk, mu k,  plus m1 2mg plus f static max times 1 plus and m1 over m2.  But f static max is mu N, and N is m2g.  So I get m2g times 1 plus m1 over m2.  And there is, if I push any harder than that,  block 2 will slip with respect to block 1.  Again, all of our terms have the dimensions of acceleration.  This is dimensionless-- 1, dimensions of acceleration.  And we did miss one little thing.  We missed the coefficient of static friction.  And there we have it, a tricky problem. 