 The following content is provided under a Creative  Commons license.  Your support will help MIT OpenCourseWare  continue to offer high quality educational resources for free.  To make a donation or view additional materials  from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT OpenCourseWare  at ocw.mit.edu.  JOHN ESSIGMANN: Let's take a look at storyboard 14,  where I discuss the Q cycle.  If you look back at my previous lecture in which I introduced  the respiratory apparatus, you'll  see that there are three points in the electron transport  chain, at which protons are translocated  across the mitochondrial inner membrane,  into the intermembrane space.  The three sites are complex one, complex two, and complex four.  If your entry point for the electrons  is a pair of electrons at NADH, you'll  translocate about 10 protons.  This generates the electrochemical gradient  that will be used in complex five, the F naught f1 synthase.  And the energy released in proton translocation back  into the cytoplasm, eventually will be used to synthesize ATP.  At this point, I'd like to take a look  at the hypothetical mechanism by which proton  translocation into the intermembrane space  happens in complex three.  At the outset, let me say that the mechanism here  is different from the mechanism at complex one  and complex four.  And I'll also mention that other organisms have found other ways  to solve this problem of translocating protons  into the intermembrane space.  Let's look at panel A of storyboard 14.  At the upper left, we see coenzyme Q in its quinone form.  In this form, it's a taxadiene dione.  It's one of our co-factors.  And we've also referred to it in the past as a mobile electron  carrier.  In that regard, it falls into the same grouping of molecules,  such as the NAD plus, NADH pair.  The squiggly line at the lower right  corner of the quinone molecule depicts isoprene units.  Actually, there's a series of about six to 10  of these isoprenes in the Q molecule.  These probably facilitate association  with hydrophobic regions, such as regions in membranes.  The structure of coenzyme Q allows  it to pick up electrons one at a time from an electron donor.  And deliver them one at a time to a place  where the electrons are going to go.  That is an electron recipient.  This panel shows the step-by-step mechanism  by which electrons, one at a time,  can reduce the oxidized form of coenzyme Q. Called Q here,  or the quinone, to its fully reduced form QH2, also known  as the hydroquinone.  These electrons come from complex one, or complex two,  or another membrane bound entry point for electrons  into respiration.  The first electron converts the quinone Q to the semiquinone  radical.  The semiquinone will then pick up another proton and electron  to form the fully reduced species, the hydroquinone,  or QH2.  The hydroquinone QH2 is fully loaded with electrons.  The fully reduced hydroquinone will next deliver its two  electrons to complex three.  The technical name of complex three  is coenzyme Q, cytochrome c oxidoreductase.  This name gives a hint that the electrons  are going to pass from coenzyme Q in its reduced form,  to an oxidized form of cytochrome c, which  is also non-covalently associated with complex three.  Let's look at panel B. A single molecule of QH2,  the hydroquinone, contains two electrons that  are going to be transferred to complex three.  One electron is going to reduce iron three to iron two,  in a first molecule of cytochrome C.  And then the second electron is going  to be used to reduce a second molecule of cytochrome c.  It's convenient to break this overall reaction  scheme into two parts.  I'll call them cycle one and cycle two.  In cycle one, the first molecule of cytochrome C  is going to be reduced.  And then in cycle two, the second molecule  will be reduced.  I've further broken down the cycle into eight steps.  At the upper left of complex three,  you'll see a site that I've marked with an x.  This is an iron cell for protein.  This is going to be that docking site for QH2, the semiquinone.  Sometimes it is called the Q delta site.  The reduced quinone, QH2, gives up two protons and one electron  to form the semiquinone radical, Q.minus.  The electron in step three goes over  to reduce ferric ion to ferrous iron, that  is iron three to iron two in cytochrome c.  As I mentioned earlier, cytochrome c  is another one of our mobile electron carriers.  It's going to float away and go off to complex four.  At this point in step four B, the semiquinone radical  is going to give up its second electron  to cytochrome bL, which is a constituent  of the complex three.  From the standpoint of coenzyme Q, at this point  it's lost both of its electrons.  It has been converted to the fully oxidized form  Q, as depicted in step four A. The electron  at cytochrome bL flows into cytochrome bH.  And from there, it will subsequently  flow into a molecule of the parental diquinone Q. The one  electron reduction of the diquinone Q, results  in the formation of the semiquinone radical,  once again.  This is at position Y--  the way I've drawn the complex three in panel B. Position Y  is also called the Qi site.  At this point, the semiquinone radical  will just stay where it is for a few minutes.  We'll pick it up again in the second half of the Q Cycle.  To summarize what happened in the first half of the Q Cycle,  two protons have been translocated from the matrix  into the intermembrane space.  And one electron has been transferred  to cytochrome c, which then translocates  across the outer surface of the mitochondrial inner membrane  to complex four.  At this point, please look at panel C.  Now we're going to take a look at the second half of the Q  Cycle.  At the bottom of complex three in step 1,  you'll see the orphaned semiquinone radical  that we just created.  Keep in mind that we are going to come back  and use that radical in a couple of minutes.  So bear with me.  At step two, we see a second molecule  of the hydroquinone, QH2, inside the mitochondrial inner  membrane.  We're going to borrow this molecule for a short time.  And then we're going to restore it.  So this QH2 is, essentially, catalytic  in the overall reaction scheme.  In step three, we see that this borrowed molecule  of the hydroquinone, QH2, gives up two protons and one electron  just as we had seen in the first half of the cycle.  You will note that we are reducing  a second molecule of cytochrome c, which is then going  to go off to complex four.  And we're also going to be producing  a second molecule of coenzyme Q, the fully  oxidized form of the co-factor.  In step four B, the semiquinone radical, just as  happened in cycle one, will give up  its electron to cytochrome bL.  The electron will then go to cytochrome bH,  and then will flow into the semiquinone radical  that we had left over from the first cycle.  This radical exists at site Y, or as I called it before,  the Qi site of complex three.  The reduction of the semiquinone radical at step six  is concomitant in step seven with the acquisition  of two protons from the matrix.  This series of reactions, ultimately,  results in restoration of QH2, the semiquinone  in the mitochondrial inner membrane.  At this point, we have restored the molecule of QH2,  at step eight, that we had borrowed, initially,  at step two.  The second cycle has also produced  net Q, the oxidized form of the co-factor,  which is now free to go on to complexes one and two,  and to pick up more reducing equivalents.  Just looking at the second half of the Q Cycle, what we see  is that we've translocated another two protons  into the intermembrane space.  And we have transferred a second electron to cytochrome c.  So cycle one and cycle two, each,  result in the translocation of two protons  from the matrix to the intermembrane space.  And each results in the transfer of one electron  to cytochrome c.  Looking at the whole Q Cycle, that is cycle one and cycle two  together, we get a pair of electrons that enter from QH2.  Four protons are translocated into the intermembrane space.  And two reduced molecules of cytochrome c,  which then migrate to complex four,  where they'll be later oxidized.  Let's turn to storyboard 15 and panel A. In panel A,  I'm showing another way to look at the Q Cycle.  I'll emphasize that this is not as chemically  accurate as the two step process that I showed you previously.  And I'm not going to discuss it here further.  Nevertheless, I think that this presentation  makes it relatively easy for you to see  the overall stoichiometry of the Q Cycle.  Let's now turn to storyboard 15, panel B.  In the way of a high-level review of electron transport  so far, electrons from nutrient oxidation  have been deposited into the electron transport chain.  The transfer of electrons to oxygen  resulted in energy that is used to power pumps--  pumps that pump protons into the intermembrane space.  We've looked at the Q Cycle as one example, of several,  of how protons are pumped.  It took energy to create this proton gradient.  When we release the proton gradient  by allowing the protons to flow through the ATP synthase,  we're going to be able to use that energy in order  to accomplish the otherwise energetically  uphill phosphorylation of ADP into ATP.  Now let's look at storyboard 15, panel C. This panel  shows the F naught F1 proton translocating ATP synthase,  also known as the ATP synthase.  To put things in perspective, at the top  is the intermembrane space, which  is where the protons have been translocated.  In the middle is the mitochondrial inner membrane.  And at the bottom is the mitochondrial matrix.  Because we've pumped protons into the intermembrane space,  its pH is about three quarters of a pH unit  lower than the pH of the matrix of the mitochondria.  Proton flow is going to be regulated in response  to physiologic needs.  I'll talk about that regulation and how it occurs later.  For now, however, let's look at protons flowing through the F  naught F1 complex.  Let's imagine that the broken line  indicates a channel, through which protons will flow.  Other structural features include  a shaft, which I've indicated as gamma,  and a ring, in which the shaft is embedded,  which I've indicated as the C-ring.  When protons flow, both the shaft and the C-ring  will move, as you'll see, in a clockwise rotation.  At the bottom of the overall apparatus  are three alpha and three beta subunits.  These are not going to rotate.  That is, they're going to stay fixed  in position while the C-ring and the gamma subunit rotate.  The beta subunit contains a site x,  which is going to be the active site for conversion of ADP  plus inorganic phosphate to ATP.  I've drawn a little elbow on the bottom of the gamma subunit.  Let's imagine that protons are flowing.  And the flow makes that subunit spin around.  And further, imagine that the elbow is  bumping into the active sites--  that is, the x sites.  There are three of the x sites, one  on each of the b subunits at the bottom  of the overall apparatus.  Imagine that the energy involved is translocated from the elbow  to the active sites.  And that's what's going to help us align ADP and Pi,  to make the overall chemical reaction favorable.  That is a hypothetical, but not far fetched way  to think about the way that ATP is made.  Let's now look at panel D. The current view  is that the active site oscillates among three  different conformations during the time  the protons are translocated.  These three conformational states  are referred to as O for open, L for loose, and T for tight.  In the open state, nothing is present at the active site x.  The conversion of open to loose is  concomitant with the binding of ADP and inorganic phosphate.  As protons continue to flow, the loose site  is converted into the tight state.  The energy associated with this conformational change results  in the alignment of the inorganic phosphate,  such that the conditions are now favorable  for it to phosphorylate ADP and form ATP.  Further proton flow results in the tight state being converted  to the open state, which ejects the formed ATP out  into the mitochondrial matrix.  So at each cycle, of open to loose to tight,  a molecule of ATP is made.  And then it is ejected.  This goes on again, and again, and again.  That's the overall mechanism by which ATP is synthesized.  At the high level, proton flow results in the movement  as the turning of a rotor.  It is a lot like a water wheel that  might drive the rotation of a millstone, that grinds grain  into flour.  The rotation of the shaft provides energy  to bump into the x sites, resulting  in the conversion of a first subunit  to the open conformation, another subunit  to the loose state, and a third subunit to tight.  Then the process starts over again,  with each cycle producing one molecule of ATP.  As one final point--  a point that explains how this process is regulated.  Proton flow results from the binding of ADP--  that is, ADP.  This will become important in a few minutes  when we talk about how the whole system is regulated.  Now let's look at storyboard 16.  Let's look at all four panels, panels A through D.  In the last part of this lecture,  I'd like to talk about how respiration  is coupled to the TCA cycle and glycolysis.  This is really the first time in 5.07  that we're going to see the beauty  of coordinated pathway regulation.  I'm going to use a physiological scenario in order,  hopefully, to make it all make sense.  In this scenario, imagine that you're being chased down  the street by a dog.  In order to start running away from the dog,  we're going to need some ATP that's very quickly generated  from glucose by glycolysis.  The TCA cycle is also going to be operative,  along with a pathway we haven't seen so far,  fatty acid oxidation.  In both cases, the TCA cycle and fatty acid oxidation,  reduced electron carriers are going to be produced.  They're going to give up their electrons to the electron  transport chain.  Ultimately, to reduce oxygen to water and with concomitant  pumping of protons into the intermembrane space,  resulting in the lowering of the pH--  that is, acidification of the intermembrane space.  As I mentioned earlier, that flow  of protons through the ATP synthase  is triggered by the binding of ADP  to the x site on the beta subunit of the enzyme complex.  As your muscles are working hard and you're running away  from the dog, the concentration of ADP  in the mitochondrial matrix is going to be increasing.  Thus, proton flow is going to be initiated.  As you run more and more, the protons  are depleted from the intermembrane space.  It's not known exactly how this reduction in proton  concentration results in accelerated  movement of electrons through the electron transport chain.  It's tempting to speculate that one or more  of the reductase centers, within the electron transfer chain,  may be pH sensitive.  Let's imagine that that is the case.  So let's imagine that the raising of pH--  that is, the decrease in hydrogen ion concentration  in the intermembrane space, results  in the facilitated flow of electrons from complex one  or complex two, to oxygen.  Next, let's look to the far left at the bottom of panel D.  As you draw more electrons into respiration,  NADH is going to be converted to NAD plus.  It's important, now, to remember that NADH feedback inhibits  any step at which it's produced in the TCA cycle.  Thus, as you're running away from the dog,  the NADH concentration drops.  And that means that there's going  to be less inhibition of the steps at which NADH  is produced in the TCA cycle.  Thus, looking at the big picture, the binding  of increased concentrations of ADP to the ATP synthase,  over on the far right, results in the activation of the TCA  cycle and other metabolic pathways that  will result in the delivery of more electrons  through the electron transport chain,  in order to allow you to continue  to run away from the dog.  Next, let's imagine that you've been running for quite a while.  And let's look at complex four, where oxygen is bound.  Sooner or later you're going to be becoming oxygen limited.  You're going to be panting heavily.  This means that electron flow from a reduced electron  carriers to oxygen is going to slow down.  As we become more hypoxic, respiration starts to fail,  but hypoxia dramatically increases  the levels or activities of the enzymes of glycolysis.  Thus, glycolysis will switch over  to becoming our principal ATP generation machine.  As we increase the rate of glycolysis,  the flux goes from glucose to pyruvate,  but the pyruvate can't be oxidized  because it can't enter respiration,  because we don't have enough oxygen present in order  to oxidize it.  So what happens is we activate lactate dehydrogenase  to convert pyruvate to lactate.  Conversion of pyruvate to lactate has two consequences.  The first is that conversion results in the conversion  of NADH to NAD plus.  Remember, that this is the lactate shuttle.  And that NAD plus is now available to allow  glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase  to continue processing molecules of glucose into ATP.  A second consequence of activation  of lactate dehydrogenase is the fact  that lactate spills out into the blood, where  it acidifies the blood.  The pH drops.  Now let's think about what the consequences are  when the pH of the blood drops.  I want you to think back to the lectures in which JoAnne talked  about cooperatively, the Bohr effect, and the affinity  of oxygen for hemoglobin.  JoAnne told us that protons are heterotropic allosteric  effectors that, effectively, loosen the affinity of oxygen  for hemoglobin.  So as you're running away from the dog,  glycolysis becomes the main pathway.  You produce a lot of lactate that goes into the blood.  The pH drops.  Oxygen lowers its affinity for hemoglobin,  and thus, becomes more available for the pathway of respiration.  Oxygen is now back in the system and binds to complex four.  So you kind of get what we could call a second wind that  allows you to continue using respiration  to run away from the dog.  In other words, you've adapted to the stressful state  and are now able to continue running.  Now let's put it all together.  A dog starts chasing you.  Your readily available energy reserves, and free glucose,  as well as glycogen, will produce  rapid ATP that will get you moving away from the dog.  Additionally, respiration will be contributing lots of ATP  to allow you to escape the dog.  And as you're running, ADP concentrations  will go up inside your mitochondria.  That will, basically, release the proton gradient,  allowing the ATP synthase to work very quickly and very hard  to make a lot more ATP.  NADH concentrations in the mitochondria  will drop with physical activities.  This helps boot up the dehydrogenases of the TCA  cycle.  They become less inhibited.  Your TCA cycle will accelerate, in order  to produce more reducing equivalents to power  the electron transport chain.  All of this will continue until your oxygen becomes limiting,  then respiration starts to fail, but the hypoxic state turns up  the activities of the enzymes of glycolysis,  thus glycolysis accelerates and helps accommodate.  But pyruvate, at the end of glycolysis,  cannot be further oxidized because there's not enough  oxygen. It has to be converted to lactate.  The lactate acidifies the blood.  The Bohr effect causes the release of more oxygen  into the blood, making it more available to complex four,  in order to reboot the electron transport chain.  Overall, this is a marvelously regulated physiological system  that seems to have evolved in order to promote our survival. 