 The following content is provided under a Creative  Commons license.  Your support will help MIT OpenCourseWare  continue to offer high quality educational resources for free.  To make a donation or view additional materials  from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT OpenCourseWare  at ocw.mit.edu.  JOHN ESSIGMANN: We're now on storyboard 12, session 13.  Let's take a look first at panel A.  I mentioned earlier that respiration  is the oxidative metabolism of all metabolic fuels,  carbohydrates as well as lipids.  If we were starting with a carbohydrate then  respiration starts with the pyruvate dehydrogenase reaction  and then proceeds into the TCA cycle,  and then into electron transport and oxidative phosphorylation.  If the acetylcholine comes from fatty acid oxidation, which  we'll cover later, then we do not  have to do the pyruvate dehydrogenase step.  Three molecules of NADH and one molecule of FADH2  are produced as the carriers of electrons  from the intermediates in the TCA cycle  from each input molecule of acetyl coenzyme A.  As I mentioned a number of times,  we look at NADH and FADH2 as relatively mobile electron  carriers.  They're going to be picking up electrons  from intermediates and biochemical pathways  and then they bring those electrons  into the mitochondrial inner membrane, where  the reducing equivalents are passed along to the electron  transport chain.  Ultimately the electrons will end up  being deposited into oxygen to make water.  Let's turn to panel B where I'm going to start  laying out the big picture.  In this small cartoon we see fuel being  oxidized to carbon dioxide.  The electrons are passed to either in NAD-plus,  or FAD to form the reduced cofactor.  The reduced co-factors find their way  to the mitochondrial inner membrane  and the electrons, or reducing equivalents,  are passed to oxygen to make water.  This process is highly exergonic.  And we'll do a model calculation in a minute  to show just how energy yielding it is,  resulting in the liberation of a lot of free energy.  That energy is captured by the movement of protons  from one side of the mitochondrial inner membrane  to the other side of the membrane.  In this process you're taking a low concentration of protons  and creating a relatively high concentration of protons.  That's an uphill process that's going to require an energy  input, and the energy from nutrient oxidation  is what powers this generation of an ion gradient.  Concentrating the protons in a small defined space  is kind of like charging a battery.  It took energy to create that high concentration of protons.  We'll see that nature invented a way to channel the protons back  through a device and a way to capture the energy released  when the gradient is dissipated.  That energy can be captured in various ways,  enabling us to be able to do useful things with it.  For example, the energy could be used  to accomplish the otherwise energy requiring process  of putting a phosphate onto ADP to make ATP,  and that way the energy is captured in a chemical bond.  Alternatively, let's think of a situation in which  you may need to generate heat.  You could allow the protons simply  to flow back across the membrane through a channel.  The energy of the proton gradient  would then be released as heat.  Thirdly, we can perhaps allow the protons to flow back  through a device that creates rotary movement  and that's how, for example, a flagellar  motor can spin to move a bacterium from one  place to another.  Let's now turn to panel C. We've seen  earlier that oxidation can result  in the production of NADH or FADH2.  To begin let's consider NADH.  In this panel you can see the NADH oxidized  where the electrons flow-- and it  doesn't matter what the path of the flow  is-- all the way to oxygen. Thermodynamics  gives us the tools to calculate how much energy you  would get in this process.  JoAnne taught you a lot about thermodynamics  in biological systems, And this is just  a repeat of what she said.  But what I'm going to do is put what  she said into a concrete, practical example.  I've drawn out at the bottom of panel C  the overall reaction, showing electrons going from NADH  to oxygen in the forward direction.  Now, of course, we could also think about the back reaction,  where electrons would flow from water into NAD-plus  to form NADH.  At this point this is just an equation on a piece of paper  and we don't know in which direction  the reaction is overall favorable.  That is, is it favorable in the forward direction  as drawn, left to right, or in the reverse direction,  right to left?  The reaction from left to right is the direction  we usually think about in the context of nutrient oxidation.  Interestingly, the reaction from right to left  is photosynthesis.  So both directions are biologically used,  but we'll see that one of the directions  will require substantial energy input in order  to make it biologically useful.  Probably you can appreciate that photosynthesis  is the energy requiring process, because we all  know that sunlight is needed to make  the process thermodynamically and kinetically favorable.  We don't cover photosynthesis in 5.07, so let  me say a few words about it.  In photosynthesis nature takes electrons from water  and uses them to reduce NADP-plus to NADPH.  Note that I said NADP-plus, and not NAD-plus,  but for the purposes here they are equivalent.  In the case of photosynthesis we know intuitively  that the overall process is powered by light,  so in going from right to left the process intuitively,  once again, should require energy.  By contrast, nutrient oxidation, where  we go from left to right in this equation,  should be a process that generates energy.  But intuition aside, let's do the calculation.  So the question is, in which direction  is the equation at the bottom of panel C thermodynamically  favorable-- left to right or right to left?  Let's take a look now at panel D.  You'll see here that I have split the master  equation into half reactions.  I always write out the half reaction  in the direction of reduction.  For example, look at the second half reaction.  It shows that half a mole of oxygen  plus two protons, plus two electrons, go to water.  Again, I've written out these reactions  in the direction of reduction.  It's just the way I do it.  Next I go to the redox chart, that  is the table of redox potentials of electrochemical reactions,  and I figure out what the standard energies are for each  of these half reactions.  As you can see, it's 0.32 volts, and, plus 0.82 volts  respectively, for the two half reactions.  Next I use a variant of the Nernst equation  to calculate the free energy and ultimately  the directionality of the reaction.  The equation I use is delta G naught prime equals  N times Faraday's constant, times the difference  in the reduction potentials of the two half reactions.  To find delta E naught prime, we look  at the reaction that I've written out,  the overall reaction, and we looked  at see which is the electron acceptor,  in which is the electron donor the way  the reaction was written.  Then we subtract the reduction potential  of the electron receptor from that of the electron donor.  The way the equation is written, left to right, oxygen  is the electron acceptor.  It's reduction potential is plus 0.82 volts, so delta E naught  prime is plus 0.8 to minus a minus 0.32,  or a total of plus 1.14 volts.  In the Nernst equation, the number  of electrons transferred in this case is two,  and Faraday's constant is 96.4 kilojoules  per mole times volts.  If you do the math, or as we say at MIT,  plug and chug, what you find out is  that the free energy change of the reaction that's written,  the NADH oxidation reaction, is minus 220 kilojoules per mole.  This number is negative and that means the reaction is favorable  as drawn.  That is, the reaction goes from left to right.  The 220 kilojoules is the amount of energy  that's available for the three purposes of the pathway.  That is, ATP synthesis, heat generation, or movement.  If we were going to make ATP, we would divide 220 by 32,  because we get about 32 kilojoules of energy  by hydrolysis of ATP, and we can calculate  that we're going to get something  in the order of about 3 ATPs for every NADH that  gives up two electrons to the electron transport chain.  We could easily do the same oxidation reaction and study  FADH2, but in this case, we would calculate  that we would get actually less energy, because the oxidation  potential of flavins, as compared to NAD, is different.  In that case, that is, FADH2 oxidation,  you would get only about two ATPs per FADH2 oxidized.  So the FADH2 produced in the succinate dehydrogenase  step of the TCA cycle is less energy  yielding than, for example, the oxidation of malate  to oxaloacetate that occurs later in the pathway.  Let's turn now to storyboard 13.  We now have an idea of the rough amount of energy  that's going to be generated by nutrient oxidation.  Next we're going to look a little bit more  in detail at the mechanism by which the electrons are  transported from the reduced substances  that constitute our electron donors, NADH and FADH2,  to molecular oxygen, or whatever the terminal electron  acceptor is in the biological system under study.  As was seen, the electron transfer  process that we've been studying liberates energy,  and that energy is going to be used to power pumps that  will transport protons from the matrix of the mitochondrian  out into the intermembrane space between the mitochondrial inner  and outer membranes.  In the case of electron transport  with the goal of ATP synthesis, the protons  that are generated in the intermembrane space  will be allowed to flow back through a device  that mechanically couples motion--  that is the spinning of a shaft--  to drive conformational changes in enzymes  that will allow the otherwise endergonic synthesis of ATP  from ADP in inorganic phosphate.  That machine is called the ATP synthase.  Let's look at panel A. This panel  shows the details of the electron transport system.  It looks a little bit complicated,  but let's not lose sight of the fact that what it's all about  is powering pumps, pumps that pump protons.  In the lower left of the panel we  see the TCA cycle generating NADH and FADH2.  The NADH approaches complex one of the mitochondrial inner  membrane.  Complex one is in an NADH dehydrogenase enzyme.  The enzyme has a flavin that accepts the electrons  from NADH, passes them along to iron sulfur centers,  and then to a variety of cytochromes.  It moves the electrons up to the point where they're  going to be transferred to coenzyme  Q. In its oxidized form, coenzyme Q  binds to complex one.  The oxidized form of coenzyme Q will  be reduced first to a semiquinone  and then to a hydroquinone, which are located, as shown,  inside the mitochondrial inner membrane.  We usually draw them as being free floating  within the membrane, but that's probably inaccurate.  These co-factors are probably bound  to physical entities inside the mitochondrial inner membrane.  The picture also shows FADH2 from the TCA cycle interacting  with complex two, which is a flavin containing enzyme,  and it will also transfer its electrons  to the oxidized form of coenzyme Q,  ultimately to create the reduced coenzyme  QH2 which is the hydroquinone.  Just as a point of reference to the TCA cycle,  complex two is also known as succinate dehydrogenase.  We haven't done fatty acid oxidation yet,  but there's a step in fatty acid oxidation  in which an alkane is converted to an alkene.  The electrons from that oxidation reaction  go through a flavin protein called ETF-pre,  for electron transferring flavor protein, and once again  those electrons flow into coenzyme Q  to form the reduced form of coenzyme Q.  Remember when we talked about the glycerol three phosphate  shuttle?  I mentioned that there's a mitochondrial membrane  associated glycerol three phosphate dehydrogenase.  You can see that enzyme at the top part of the inner membrane  as I've drawn it.  And once again, flavin in that enzyme  will carry the electrons into coenzyme Q,  generating reduced form of the co-factor QH2.  The left part of this picture pretty neatly  shows how nutrient oxidation can channel the electrons  into a common mobile electron carrier,  coenzyme Q. Lots of different fuels  give up their electrons to a common electron carrier.  The hydroquinone QH2 will then go and interact  with complex three of the electron transport chain.  In complex three, electrons will be transported  through a number of different electron relay stations  and ultimately be picked up by cytochrome C, which  is initially in its plus three oxidation state.  Cytochrome C is reduced by the single electron  coming through complex three.  In this process its iron is reduced to its plus two state.  This electron on cytochrome C then  migrates across the outer surface  of the inner membrane of the mitochondrian  to interact with complex four.  When it interacts with complex four,  the reduced form cytochrome C gives up its electron  to a copper residue on the copper  A subunit of complex four.  In the figure, this complex is called CuA.  the more common name for complex four is cytochrome C oxidase.  So cytochrome c oxidase oxidizes is the iron back  to its iron three oxidation state, then cytochrome C  migrates back to complex three where  it's able to pick up another electron.  We can think of cytochrome C as a mobile electron carrier that  shuttles an electron along the inner surface  of the mitochondrial inner membrane.  Looking back at complex four, or cytochrome C oxidase,  the electrons are passed from cytochrome A  to a series of other electron carriers,  and ultimately they flow into molecular oxygen.  Molecular oxygen is anchored on one side to heme A3  and on the other side to copper B.  Oxygen undergoes a four electron reduction and picks  up four protons along the way to form two molecules of water.  If the electrons started with NADH and ends up in oxygen  to form water, you get 220 kilojoules of energy.  And as I said, you get somewhat less  of your electrons started out as a reduced flavin.  Now let's look at panel B. I want  to say a few words at the outset about proton pumps,  keeping in mind that the reason electrons were moved  through the electron transport chain was to power these pumps.  In the lower left part of the figure, we can see complex one.  The transit of electrons through complex one from NADH  results in the transport of four protons  from the mitochondrial matrix into the intermembrane space.  That is, two electrons from NADH are transported,  and coincident with that, four protons  are pumped into the intermembrane space.  Later we'll see that complex three  is the location of something called the Q cycle.  I'm going to cover the proton pumping  properties of the Q cycle in some detail  in the next storyboard.  The passage of those two electrons  through complex three results in the transport  of an additional four protons into the intermembrane space.  Lastly, the transit of electrons through complex four,  the cytochrome C oxidase, results  in the transport of another two protons  into the intermembrane space.  Now let's look at panel C. Adding things up,  if we start with two electrons coming  from NADH we transport about 10 protons  into the intermembrane space.  That's enough to make about three molecules of ATP.  If our electrons start with FADH2 reduced flavin,  we only transport about six protons.  That's enough to make two ATPs.  If you remember, making ATP is only one of the things  that we can do with the power of the proton gradient.  I mentioned earlier that we can also use  it to generate heat and motion.  Let me talk for a minute about why one  would want to generate heat.  Newborn babies are like small balls.  They have a high surface to volume ratio.  Their high surface to volume ratio  makes heat loss a very significant reality,  and, in fact, a problem for the newborn.  They have, therefore, specialized mitochondria  in their neck in an area called brown fat.  The fat is brown because it is loaded with highly colored  mitochondria.  These mitochondria have a protein  that enables the protons pumped into the intermembrane space  to flow back freely into the mitochondrial matrix  with the generation of heat.  That is, they don't make ATP in the brown fat, they make heat.  This helps promote thermal regulation in the baby.  This is also the mechanism by which  hibernating animals, such as a bear,  can maintain body temperature during the winter  when the bear is hibernating.  This process overall is called uncoupling  of electron transport, from the process  that we're going to be looking at next, oxidative  phosphorylation.  Oxidative phosphorylation is the process by which  we're going to be making ATP.  Uncoupling is also a process used  by some flowers that have to come up  through frozen ground in the springtime.  For example, the skunk cabbage and the crocus  are very good at uncoupling electron transport  from oxidative phosphorylation.  They let the protons in the proton gradient flow  back across the mitochondrial inner membrane,  and by doing so these plants are able to generate  heat that will allow them to grow  at subfreezing temperatures.  In other words, the plant itself becomes a little heater.  At this point, let me give you a little bit  of a preview of how we use this proton gradient in order  to synthesize ATP.  As we have seen, it took energy in order  to create a gradient in which there are protons  in the intermembrane space, and protons are chemical entities,  so we've created a chemical gradient.  But also, we're putting a very high positive charge  density in the small, enclosed intermembrane space.  So we have also created an electrochemical gradient.  It is the release of those gradients that empowers  many of our vital processes.  For a final comment please see panel D. Peter Mitchell figured  out how the energy in that electrochemical gradient  could be released and converted into the energy  it takes to make chemical bonds.  Mitchell's conclusions serve as the basis  of what is called the chemiosmotic coupling  hypothesis, and we'll be looking at that in some detail later. 