 GUEST SPEAKER: I'm going to present to you  some important criteria by which to evaluate  the legislative proposals in the legislative hearings.  And I'm going to present them in my suggested order  of importance of the criteria.  So number one, I would suggest the most important criterion  is science.  So ask yourself, does the question  used to evaluate the proposals, ask  yourself does the proposal accord with valid research  on maintaining fish populations?  Number two, I would suggest the second most important criterion  is policy design and economics.  Ask yourself does the proposal include a well-designed policy?  And number three, I would suggest  that the third most important criterion is politics.  Ask yourself does the proposal have support and is  it likely to pass, or can you make it likely to pass?  Values and management are two other criteria  that I have not ranked in the top three for this issue.  If you take a look at the handout on the board,  you'll see why I haven't ranked management  as the most important criterion for this issue.  We already have the Magnuson-Stevens Act,  which is the federal legislation used to manage fisheries.  And since it was revised in 1996 you can see the top map shows--  with the red circles, all the red circles  are fish populations that have recovered  in the New England states, your home constituency since 2000.  And the graph on the bottom shows an overall decline  in fish stocks that are having measured as overfished.  So this isn't primarily a management problem because we--  there will doubtless be proposals with management  problems, but for this issue, we at least  know that management is possible and we  know that we have some success in managing this issue  federally.  So we have some organizational capacity  that we're already aware of.  So now I'm going to go over the three top criteria  and why I've ranked them that way  with some important questions to use to gather information  during the hearings for each of the criteria.  So number one is science.  Science I've ranked as the most important criterion  for this issue because science is our best  tool for understanding the natural world, which  includes fisheries.  Also, it's very important for this issue  because as you may know, there seems  to be legitimate disagreement about the science  on this issue.  So it's very important for you to use the hearings to assess--  you're going to have to take a stand  on which of the science that's presented to you  you think is valid.  And that's going to underpin how do  you assess the other criteria.  You're going to have to take a stand on science  in order to decide which legislation to support.  You can't really assess the policy design for example,  without knowing what science you think is legitimate.  Some really important questions to ask yourself  about the science during the hearings,  some important information to gather,  it's important to find out who funded  the research, each research that's presented to you.  Also whether the research was published  in a peer-reviewed journal.  Peer-reviewed research has been vetted by other scientists  and has had criticism from other scientists who  weren't involved in it.  Non-peer reviewed research there's no guarantee of that.  Ask yourself, is there broad agreement  among other scientists with this research  or is this research presented by one or two scientists  and the rest of the scientific community disagrees with them?  And in general, just ask yourself  when a proposal presents a method of management,  what ways of management, of fisheries management,  have data to show that they're actually effective.  So going on to number two, policy design and economics.  That's also a very important criterion  because any policies effectiveness  is going to be dependent on it being well-designed.  And the economic costs of each proposal  are real both to your constituents  and to the federal government.  And so far, we have very little information  about the different proposals policy designs.  So it is important to gather information  during the hearings about the policy design.  So some important questions to ask yourself  are what are the economic costs associated with each proposal  both to your constituents, both short-term cost  and long-term costs both to our state  and to the federal government?  What are the economic benefits of each proposal again,  both short-term and long-term?  It's important to ask yourself of the proposals which  proposal is the least coercive while still being effective?  So if we can incorporate some aspects of self-organization  of the fisheries industry that will often  make it a less coercive policy.  Also from the policy design standpoint,  an important question to try to suss out from the hearings is,  are the fisheries likely to comply with the policy?  Who's going to make them comply if they don't?  Who will implement the policy?  LAWRENCE SUSSKIND: 20 seconds.  GUEST SPEAKER: And moving on to politics,  politics is important because your re-election is important  and because the hearings are an important time  to gather political information.  LAWRENCE SUSSKIND: Thank you, very much.  Good.  Good job. 