 GUEST SPEAKER: Now good morning, Navajo Environmental Agency  members.  Given the proposed revitalization  of the nuclear power industry and the hints  that uranium mining might be revitalized in the region,  there's a growing concern amongst the agency members  regarding what this means for us, especially given  the controversy of historical precedence happened  in this area in the 1960s.  I'm here today to explain, amongst the various measures  that we are implementing, why local knowledge should be given  serious consideration and why the,  and why we should actually be involving  the local members of community in the process of developments  of uranium mining.  Now firstly, the involvement of local knowledge  improves and enriches the scientific process.  Problem framing is an inherently subjective process,  and it's not something that science can't solve on its own.  When we look at, what exactly are the problems,  who are the people who are exactly going to be affected,  and what do they think about it?  These are questions that don't lie in science, but rather  in the people.  And that's why we must move away from thinking  about a positivist view of science,  that science holds all the answers, and involve the people  and what they think about it.  And secondly, we understand from many stories in history  that science is inherently uncertain.  There are uncertainties involved in quantifying effects  of various measures.  There are uncertainties involved in determining  what impacts that a particular activity, in this case, uranium  mining, will have on the future generations.  And therefore, look and one brings in an important element  that science is not able to.  And this is ultimately patterns and trends in time and space  that people live in the area have  been observing over decades and over a large area.  Ultimately, if you bring in scientists  to examine their environmental impact of uranium mining, what  will be captured often tends to be  a screen shot, a shot in time of what  actually is going to happen.  Whereas these people have had the benefits of decades  of experience, and they will be able  tell us what's most likely to happen over time and space.  And lastly, democratization--  The uranium mining activities that are being taken  do not involve only the scientists or only the industry  members but also the people.  And it's important to ensure that their views are being  heard and are being taken into account  in the scientific process.  Of course, there will be opposition to such views.  Firstly, people might say that in the past,  the reason for these problem were that proper rules  and regulations were ignored, and the adverse impacts were  actually minimal.  I would argue that the reason why proper rules  and regulations were ignored is the fact that these people were  not actually involved in the development of these rules  and regulations.  And also, there is a false dichotomy  between scientific knowledge and local knowledge that  actually, where people think that scientists  are the only ones that are qualified  to come up with good science.  Whereas people who have not been trained in this area  would not be able to do so.  Studies have shown in history that a lot of this view  actually stems from the fact that people  aren't used to the language and the technical terms used  in science.  But when that barrier is crossed,  that people, given their critical thinking  skills and their reasoning skills,  are equally able as trained scientists  to be able to contribute to the discussion.  So ultimately, how should we ensure that local knowledge is  taken seriously?  How should we incorporate this?  This involves a mindset shift.  Local knowledge does not seek to supplant scientific knowledge  but rather strengthen it.  We need to move away from this false dichotomy  and allow locals and scientists to sit at the table  as equals, not because they are equally good at something,  but because they bring different things to the table that  are of equal value.  We also would like to recommend that boundary workers be  searched for and hired to actually take  part in this process-- "boundary workers" meaning people that  are not only able to communicate with those  on the scientific side of the boundary  but also with the local side of the boundary.  These might be people, locals who  have been trained in science and who  not only understand the scientific culture but also  the local culture.  At the same time, people, just because something  is local knowledge does not mean that it is right.  So in that sense, high standards have  to be expected of the presentation and gathering  of local knowledge, not in terms of the use of very  formal technical language, but in terms of critical thinking  and reasoning.  And only when these scientific standard, these high standards  are enforced on our local knowledge  will they be taken seriously by the scientists.  And ultimately, this entire process  is as much a cultural process is it is a scientific process.  It's not just about the scientific methods that we use,  but also in terms of leveraging the cultural and social  elements inherent in the community.  For example, we might look at the social hierarchy  in different regions.  And this varies, actually, from community to community,  from town to town.  Is there a central figure of trust that we  can bring into the discussion?  Do we have to forge unity between both locals  and the scientists?  And are there certain social practices  that might need to be avoided or adhered to  in terms of working, or getting locals and scientists to work  together?  So ultimately, our agency's role is  to avoid the events that happened in the 1960s.  And I believe that one way of doing that  is to actually bring in local knowledge.  Not as a form of opposition to what the scientists have  been doing, but as enhancement to their work, to enrich it  and to ensure that whatever solution is worked out  is in the best interest of both the community and the industry.  Thank you. 