 GUEST SPEAKER: Good morning.  As you know, this past July our National Council overturn  legislation made in December that  would have allowed Uranium Resources Incorporated to start  mining near Church Rock.  This is the same Church Rock that  was the site of the largest release of radioactive material  in US history, even larger than the Three Mile Island accident  but with much less media coverage.  Over 1,000 tons of radioactive waste  and 93 millions of gallons of radioactive waste  water were dumped into the Puerco River that day in 1979.  For those of you that remember, the warnings  came late and in English only.  So our people went on with business as usual.  Many of our relatives suffered for it.  To this day the government has not  measured the health effects of the spill.  Now, within 35 years of the Church Rock spill,  there are members of our community  that are willing to open up our lives to mining again.  Thankfully, the council's ruling has held off URI and others.  But these mining companies were waiting  with bated breath for any opportunity  to mine on our lands.  The voices demanding access to domestic sources of energy  are growing.  We need to prepare our community for inevitable discussions  about uranium mining.  I'm not here today to argue whether or not  we should allow mining.  I know a lot of you want the economic growth and the jobs.  I'm here instead to outline a strategy for integrating  our voices into state and federal policy making  and to highlight the challenges that we face.  So I'll start first with the challenges.  Integrating our knowledge into the broader discourse  will be an uphill battle.  First, we face major disadvantages  compared to the mining companies.  We don't have an organized constituency.  We can't compete with them in terms of resources.  And we don't have the influence that they  have over politicians.  Second, many will dismiss us for not being scientific  and will try to argue that we're motivated by our own interests  and, therefore, not impartial.  Third, the scientific data isn't clearly on our side yet.  The scientific community has shown that uranium  has made our community sick.  But there hasn't been enough money or time  spent on how it's made us sick.  So why is that important for us to be able to clearly share  our narrative about these health impacts with the government  and broader public?  And why is it important that we ourselves  understand the full extent of these impacts?  Because the government and corporations have failed us.  Not just failed us, they've dismissed and rejected us.  So moving forward, what is our strategy?  First, we will develop a task force  that will be in charge of mobilizing community members  and spearheading an outreach program to let  our community know about the efforts  to reduce local knowledge about the health  impacts of the uranium mining.  Second, reach out to the scientific community  for local partners.  Several institutions such as the University of New Mexico  and Southwest Research and Information Center  have expressed interest in health data.  The task force can work to get these scientists  from different institutions to partner with us on this.  Third, facilitate the conversation  around the type of data we should collect  with members of the scientific community  and our own community.  Fourth, train researchers within our community  to conduct face-to-face interviews  in English and Navajo.  Make phone calls, organize public forums  to collect data about community health.  And the data can then be validated  through random sampling to ensure validity.  Fifth, pair community researchers  with members of the scientific community  to analyze and interpret findings  in a language that can be understood  within the scientific community but also  within our own community.  And then hold public meetings around this information  to facilitate discussion about the health effects of uranium  mining as well as the impacts of the remaining  remnants of mining.  Finally, the task force should pair  with members of the scientific community  to release findings to local media,  environmental organizations, and to the broader public.  Our strategy then is to ensure that our community is  knowledgeable about the impacts of uranium mining  so that we can understand the full impact of opening  our lands up again and to be able to translate what  we have suffered in our own language  and technical language necessary to make people sit up  and take notice of us.  So I'll leave you with these numbers; 29, 521, and 30.  A 2000 study showed that Navajo uranium miners  are 29 times more likely than Navajos  that are not involved in mining to develop lung cancer.  There are now 521 abandoned mines across the Navajo Nation.  Although the federal government is taking the lead  to clean up after these mines, it  will take billions of dollars and hundreds of years.  It's time that we just don't have.  And the mining has left scars on our water and our land  that you can now estimate that 30% of our people  don't have access to uncontaminated water.  The EPA has been a valuable partner  in cleaning up old mines but there's still much to do--  sorry, but there's still much to do in protecting ourselves.  So we must convince the government that they cannot  stand by and watch as waste from the mining continues to seep  into our water, land, and our bodies. 