 DEVON NEARY: My name is Devon Neary,  I'm the Community Outreach Manager here at the CMA.  As you all know our members across the country  face constant opposition from environmental groups.  I'm here today to propose some solutions  for working with these groups [AUDIO OUT] against them.  Our most recent conflict involved an environmental group  trying to block the expansion of our southwest computer chip  factory on the grounds that pollution is causing  a spike in local cancer rates.  So what should our goal be in designing a working plan  with this environmental group?  I propose a strategy that is different from how the CMA  usually conducts business.  I propose we sit down in remediated negotiations  with the environmental groups and explain  our side of the issue, allow them  to explain their side of the issue,  and find a consensus for moving forward  that enables both sides to achieve  their long-term aims given the constraints of reality.  We want to open up a space to collaborate and brainstorm  nonbinding options as a means of moving  towards a binding agreement.  Why should this be our goal?  Environmental groups pressure us and attempt  to block us at our sites throughout the country.  These disputes have not improved over the last few decades,  and it's time for a new approach to make sure our projects  progress according to time and financial constraints.  My research on this issue supports the idea  that a consensus-building approach can improve  outcomes for all parties.  Just for a little bit of context,  in reality, our partners in the environmental organization  do not have a lot of legal ground to stand on.  Proving the cause of a specific cancer in a specific individual  and tying it to a specific chemical that came out  of our chip plant on a specific day  is very challenging and costly in a courtroom.  We can gently remind environmentalists  that court is expensive, adversarial, and often drawn  out.  Ultimately, our funding and legal capabilities  will defeat theirs.  In addition, in times of economic duress  and uncertainty, local authorities  are going to make way for our great industry  to create jobs and capital.  So in some sense, there's no need for us  to engage with the environmentalists.  Without the negotiation, we'll probably  still get our expansion.  However, what I want to point out  is that we can do better than that through the negotiation.  We can prove our relationships with environmentalists,  and we can make it easier and less costly to do business  in the future.  I know many of you probably have some hesitations about this.  Perhaps you feel a fear of the unknown,  a fear that the process will fail  or a fear that the negotiation will be slow and costly.  But remember we're investing for long-term gains  in our relationships with surrounding communities.  I understand this is atypical for our powerful industry  and there will be challenges.  As the views of the CMA and the views of the environmental  groups differ radically.  The environmentalists may not be ready or willing to negotiate.  They may be intent on filing a lawsuit,  or they could draw out the negotiations  in a disruptive manner.  Their ultimate goal would probably  be to eliminate our plant, but this is not a realistic demand.  Our plant is already there and operating well,  so eliminating the potential carcinogens  is not a feasible option for them.  So what is the next best option for the community?  Our strategy is to think in terms  of what we can offer them to appease some of their concerns  without giving up anything precious to us.  Do they need health clinics in their community?  Do they want a community buyout so they can relocate?  Would they like a new nature preserve or funding  for education?  For our part our members have to decide away  from the table, how much we are willing to give  to smooth out these relationships and leverage  these concessions in negotiations.  We need to find out what people on both sides  are really willing to live with.  We can begin by addressing their environmental concerns,  talking about issues of leaks, accidents,  the increased rates of cancer that they're observing.  How can we prove to them that we are  in compliance with regulations and protecting the abutting  communities?  We can also leverage what we do well for the community.  We create jobs, we spur economic development,  we make philanthropic donations, provide job training.  My job is to get people excited about chemical manufacturing  and all the wonderful things we do for the country  and for the world.  The chips manufacturing plant in question,  while maybe causing some pollution,  is manufacturing computer chips used  in a wide range of industries including  defense, medical research, education, and so on.  We believe that if residents realize the contribution we  have in their community and for the country,  they'll be more amenable to negotiating with us.  So you want to focus on two principles.  You want to focus on maintaining relationships throughout.  And We want to focus on mutual gains.  So we'll follow a process based on a research  consensus-building approach.  When we are ready to negotiate and the environmentalist  express that they are ready, first we  will convene and assign roles.  For example, we need to identify a mediator.  The mediator will schedule and facilitate the meetings,  consult privately with groups and push us to build consensus.  We also want to focus on group problem solving.  How can we create value as a group?  By brainstorming different options together  based on our interests and being creative,  we can present alternative designs.  We can expand the means of dealing with externalities  and try to create different packages of benefits  we can offer the community.  Once we have created value, we can talk about ways  to distribute value to implement these goals  and to hold parties accountable for their commitments.  So just to review the benefits of engaging  in a successful negotiation for our company.  It's an opportunity to educate the community about our work  and our constraints to gain some flexibility in when  and how requirements are met and to smooth out  these longstanding and disruptive  and conflicts with environmentalists.  With the environmentalists, they can  achieve better environmental gains, reap added value,  and enforce stronger business practices in their community  all at a lower cost.  Thank you. 