 GUEST SPEAKER: I'm here to talk to you today  about why mission of the World Bank's  new Office of Sustainable Development  should be to promote sustainable economic development.  First I'll explain what sustainable development means  in the context of global investment in developing  countries.  Then I will discuss why the World Bank ought  to put a premium on these particular kinds of investments  and why it ought to promote environmental protection  in its work.  To understand sustainable development,  we must first understand that the well-being  of the economic system is intrinsically  tied to the well-being of the environment.  The economy's functioning depends  on inputs from nature, which is then  exchanged among various market actors  and eventually output is waste into the environment.  The economy grows at a unsustainable rate  when the rate of resource consumption and waste  production exceeds the rate in which the environment can  regenerate and absorb waste products.  It is also important to note here  that economic growth is simply a measure of total resource  throughput.  It says nothing about happiness, health, safety, or sense  of community within a region.  Now that we've defined growth, we  can contrast it with the concept of development.  Development is the quality of improvement of resource  efficiency within a region.  To invest in projects that promote development  in poor countries is to invest in projects  that allow people to produce more with the resources they  already have.  These kinds of projects might involve investing in education,  investing in the construction of local hospitals and clinics,  or investing in research and development of crop seeds  that are less resource intensive.  While projects that promote growth simply  increase production and consumption,  projects that promote development  increase the efficiency of production and consumption  towards some end that enhances human welfare.  Economic growth is less important  than economic development because growth,  usually measured in terms of GDP,  is a flawed measure of progress.  There is nothing inherently beneficial  about economic growth.  This is because growth only implies an increase in resource  throughput.  But It doesn't take into account whether the resources are being  used in ways that efficiently maximize well-being  while minimizing resource consumption.  On the other hand, economic development  does a far better job of indicating economic progress.  Development implies that resources are being used  in increasingly efficient ways.  The more developed a country is, the more  of benefits from the resources it  has while minimizing its total consumption of these resources.  As it becomes more and more clear to people  across the world that development, not growth, should  be our top priority, then the base investment goals  would be in line with the goals of the rest of the world.  This is because investors will want the same thing  as anyone else, the maximum amount of benefit  they can get at the lowest cost.  Likewise, individuals who recognize development  as their goal want to receive the greatest benefit  from natural resources they use while minimizing these risks  consumption.  As the UN's international financial institution,  the World Bank's mission is to reduce poverty.  It should do this by promoting economic development which  insures the long-run integrity of economic systems.  If the bank instead chooses to promote economic growth,  it will be investing in projects that contribute to constructing  an unsustainable economic and social paradigm  with incredible inertia.  The longer economic growth remains the dominant measure  of progress, the more difficult it  will be to change our consumption  patterns in business practices to ones  that are more sustainable.  The World Bank may not look very far  in seeking out philosophical justification  for taking this measure.  Utilitarianism, the common philosophical foundation  for much of existing environmental policy,  tells us that we should take the forward-looking utility  maximizing action.  Choosing to make investments that promote development, not  growth, is just such an action.  This is because human well-being, in the long run,  is maximized when the very goal of the economic system  is to provide for human needs while maintaining  the integrity of the environment in the long run.  Human welfare is certainly not maximized  when the goal of the economic system  is to simply maximize consumption  without regard to the system's long-run viability.  Such economic growth reduces our collective welfare  because it leads to depletion of economic inputs,  natural resources, and it uses raw materials, as well  the accumulation in economic outputs  which are manifested by landfills and garbage patches.  Neither of these outcomes are ones that anyone would want.  If the World Bank's goal is to reduce poverty in the long run,  then let's take a long-run view of success.  As a UN initiative with a moral imperative,  the World Bank should work to ensure that it's investment  decisions are based on the utility maximizing philosophy  that promotes long-run human welfare.  Indeed investments and development related projects  pay dividends over many years, while investments  in growth related projects may only  provide for human needs for a short period of time.  It is the World Bank's responsibility  to take into account the long run  well-being of the environment because the viability  of economic systems depend on its sustained integrity.  To promote growth is to promote the idea that the economy can  continue to flourish independently  of the environment, an idea that is a fiction.  However, to promote development means  to promote human progress that is  sensitive to the environments carrying capacity  and actively works to promote environmental stewardship  while tending to human needs.  This is the goal on which all economies should be based.  To that end, the World Bank should  work to promote this idea in our newest economies  so that they take no time in choosing the best  method to promote the progress of their people.  Thank you. 