 GUEST SPEAKER: Great.  Thank you very much, everyone, for the opportunity  to present some of the strategies  that we can use to influence federal policy making in  regards to renewable energy.  So first of all, I'm just give you,  just going to give you a brief overview of the presentation  today.  So first, I'm going to talk a little bit  about some background information  about climate change regulation here in the United States.  Then I'm going to give you a general overview  about the policy making process.  And with that, I'm going to give you specific strategies  that we can use to employ and increase employments  over federal policy making.  So just briefly, the three strategies are, first one,  take advantage of the political momentum.  The second one is to frame climate change  as both an energy issue and as a health issue.  And the third one will be to focus  on tax credit for investments in renewable energy production.  So as a way of a background, as you know,  renewable resources and climate change regulation  are closely linked.  So unfortunately, climate change regulation  is, congressional action on climate change is stalled.  However, the federal government and President Obama,  more specifically, recently proposed regulation to cut--  and the wording is, carbon pollution  from power plants in 30% by 2030.  So this is a very big opportunity.  And as you can see in the diagram,  I'm just going to talk about three phases, if you will.  There are more phases after that.  But it's agenda setting, policy formulation, policy option.  So the first thing that you, that's important  is that this is not a sequential--  line of-- policy making.  Even though we do have some legislation on renewable energy  and tax credit, we are still, we still  have to take advantage of the agenda setting phase  and the policy formulation and the policy adoption.  So the first strategy that I talked  about before, which is take advantage  of the political momentum, is that we have to make sure  that we take advantage of the fact that climate change  is now permanent in the media, not only  because of this announcement of this new push for regulation  of power plant emission.  But also-- we have to make sure that the United Nations climate  summit creates also this opportunity for us  to put this, the action on renewable energy  and the political agenda.  The second strategy will be to frame renewable energy  as both a climate change issue and a health issue.  So as I said before, President Obama's announcement  was targeting health issues, or climate change  as a public health issue.  So I think that's an interesting way  to frame our policy proposals and use  this framing that was already given  by the federal government.  But we can use it in our advantage.  By reducing fossil fuel use, we can actually  increase public health.  So also, just remembering that the issue is already  part of the institutional agenda,  meaning that renewable energy and tax  credit for renewable energy production  is already part of the institutional agenda  because there's already regulation in place.  Unfortunately, the tax credit will expire by 2016.  So we need to make sure that it continues in the agenda  and propose the tax credit in the policy formulation  and make sure that is adopted after it expires.  So just briefly, I'm just going to give you  five reasons why a tax credit is a important policy  instrument in this case.  First of all, it's the only issue that you all agree on.  So I think the fact that this coalition actually  has a consensus on one policy instrument  is a very important political tool  that we can use to actually tell Congress, well,  this is what we agree on, all sides of--  this issue.  And second, there is no direct expenditure.  So basically, tax credit is an investment.  There is no additional expenditure.  Third, it's easier to administrate because we already  have the institutional framework in place.  And we already have tax credits anyway.  It's not a new, a brand new proposal.  And fourth, it's technically and politically feasible.  So we just have to make sure that we tell Congress  that there's regulations already in place.  It's, renewable energy is technically feasible.  And so we just need more incentives  to actually invest in renewable energy  and make sure that better regulation that was proposed  by President Obama actually has a positive impact  on renewable energy production.  Thank you. 