 The following content is provided under a Creative  Commons license.  Your support will help MIT OpenCourseWare  continue to offer high quality educational resources for free.  To make a donation, or to view additional materials  from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT OpenCourseWare  at ocw.mit.edu.  OK, so this is the second part of the class,  and this the last for the semester.  So I think we've traveled a lot.  We see many difficult issues I think.  And I want to give you credit, I think,  for-- during the semester for being so open, and honest,  and being able to engage into difficult issues.  And each time that you guys were presenting you  might remember me liking you to you  to get deeper into personal issues  and not just the abstract.  And the reason is because I think you make a better  case where everyone is of use you can bring  your own narrative into it.  And I think it's-- overall I think it has worked and myself  learned so much from the semester from listening to you,  some of your own personal discoveries about yourself,  about issues of race, language, gender, sexuality.  And I give you lots of gratitude.  It's risky, and because when you came here,  you didn't know each other, most of you right?  And yet to be able open yourself to the difficult questions  and to give answers that were so thoughtful.  And so-- many of them I didn't expect some of you  to literally come out in this class, in a way.  Right?  So I thought that very well in this class.  So I give you my respect for that.  So I'm going to end passing to you.  AUDIENCE: Yeah.  MICHEL DEGRAFF: You get a little while more,  maybe you've got things that you feel  you take with you to the next steps  so that you feel that all this will come  after you this class might benefit from anything that you  want share, in terms of your learning  experience in this class, and how you think  can bridge those gaps that we've seen because  of our societies, our families?  So I wasn't here last Thursday but I watched  the video of the whole class.  [inaudible] too, actually really impressed  by how you guys brought up your personal issues.  And so but these are going to have worked on.  I assume you have to make some.  For this class-- for this class 40 minutes or so  you have to be something to bring out.  We'll go to Nicky.  You're going to take a pass?  OK we'll go to Edna.  AUDIENCE: She's quicker with words.  MICHEL DEGRAFF: Yeah.  AUDIENCE: So I'm not sure if I fully understand what  I'm supposed to say, but I'm--  MICHEL DEGRAFF: Anything.  AUDIENCE: --going to say what I was thinking.  So for me personally throughout this class I think I realized--  I explored myself and my identity way more,  and I think I was forced to ask questions about myself that I  hadn't.  And for me the main thing I realized  is like how uncomfortable I am with being multiracial.  I enjoy being multiracial but I didn't  realize that there's parts of me that don't necessarily  fit together, and how I don't really see myself as one  certain race, or whatever.  And I think the things that with that were our personal essays,  and definitely free writing assignments  that one of the guest professors had us do,  that got pretty deep.  And I was kind of like, oh crap I  have to write at 9:30 in the morning, when she first  said that.  But then I really enjoyed it.  And I think like maybe bringing out more multi-racial topics  next year would be beneficial to people  to know that that was a problem with themselves.  And I think also a really interesting topic  that we went over was--  I think-- What did we call it?  Faking?  Passing, passing-- and how it's a privilege.  And talking about like all the controversial issues on that  and don't think I really also thought about that  before this class.  So that was something I benefited from.  MICHEL DEGRAFF: So you say faking instead of passing?  AUDIENCE: Yeah.  And it reminded of a comment Cynthia made back then, right?  That often, when we think of passing  we think of it as something which is negative--  AUDIENCE: Yeah.  MICHEL DEGRAFF: But contained in that point, which  I remember very well, I thought very important  that passing should not be viewed from that perspective.  I say to that point that we can think  of passing as a normal survival strategy in a way.  So maybe--  AUDIENCE: Yeah.  MICHEL DEGRAFF: That's a nice segue to think of [inaudible]..  AUDIENCE: I actually have another one I think.  MICHEL DEGRAFF: Say it again?  AUDIENCE: Nothing, can I have another one?  MICHEL DEGRAFF: Sure of course.  [inaudible]  [laughter]  AUDIENCE: So I guess it's sort of hard,  I think it sort of takes a lot of reflecting--  MICHEL DEGRAFF: Yeah.  AUDIENCE: Sort of think about all that that we've discussed.  Sort of a quick note, one of things that this class has  sort of solidified for me is the importance of conversations.  And so I think most of learning that I've done in this class  and other sort of seminar based classes sort of pales  in comparison-- or what I've learned in my technical courses  pales in comparison to the things  that I learn in classes like this  because at the end of the day, I think most of the learning  comes from those around you.  Class needs this.  So, experiences that they have more so  than what you learn in these technical classes.  There's a saying that says five years after you graduate  you won't remember 90% or whatever of what  you learned in college.  But I think what you do remember is  these sort conversations that boil down  to personal experiences.  And so I think, again, there is a challenge  in this world of sort of approaching  people who aren't really willing to have these conversations.  But sort of changing yourself is the first step.  And I think if everyone sort of makes this, or has  this realization, takes a step toward making this change,  It's very idealistic, but I think  the world be a better place.  And so I think that's probably one thing that I've  gotten from this class.  AUDIENCE: Go man.  AUDIENCE: Bouncing off of what Burk said,  I think one way in which I would like to see his class grow is  the integration of having some sort of conversation like open  discussion instead of debate with someone who does not come  from a similar theological-- not theological--  AUDIENCE: Ideological.  AUDIENCE: Thank you.  Ideological background as opposed to people  in this class, to try to see and sort of gain practice  in having a session with someone who  is a lot different from you, and developing a common trust,  and come to see each other's viewpoints  in a way that would be more informative than what  one could do among a set like-minded individuals.  AUDIENCE: Let's see.  So one thing that I enjoyed about this class  I can distinctly remember one class  that literally blew my mind I think I turned to Sonny  and was like, oh my gosh.  And that was when we interrogated  what MIT was as an institution and where we sit  in this hierarchy of social--  in the social hierarchy in the US.  And I think when coming to MIT I was  willing to give the institution a free pass a lot  because I felt that I was getting  a lot from the experience.  But I think now that I'm senior and all the seniors here  graduate-- last day of class with you guys--  now that I'm at this point where I can think back  on what MIT has done for me and what  and how it functions I think I'm better  poised to think more critically about the institutions I choose  to join future for postgraduate education and after.  AUDIENCE: So I took this class as a challenge  to myself because at the beginning,  I knew about the prejudices and stereotypes  that I had been taught, and I wanted to get rid of them.  And I think this has helped a lot with that  just by hearing everyone else's perspectives from the readings,  from looking at the world, by taking a step back  and looking at things as they are  and not how we were specifically taught that they are.  And I really appreciate that.  I want to- from here on I want to move forward  and try to figure out how to be an ally  from an asian-american perspective  because a lot of the times asian-american families  try to be the status quo.  Like my parents have always taught to try to be,  not explicitly, but implicitly try to be as white as you can.  And I think that that was a really difficult lesson  to go through, and then come to a place like MIT which  is so diverse and which has so many different backgrounds.  And so come in thinking there's a hierarchy where  there isn't and now going forward,  trying to break that down.  AUDIENCE: Related to what you said actually  is this concept of being multi-racial, and interrogating  that for yourself.  But also within a context of being in a society  of multiple races, and understanding the spaces that  exist for meaningful conversations  across cultural, and ethnic, and other sometimes  just socially constructed boundaries  that don't necessarily need to be boundaries.  And I remember in one conversation Cynthia actually  really challenged this idea of forming alliances especially  between historically, systematically  oppressed groups.  And in a class like Black Matters  I think that we actually think about people who don't identify  as black, and who may not be read as black in society,  and we've engaged critically with the issues  that they face as well.  When we talked about immigration from Mexico, and in other times  where I insist upon interjecting indigenous  North American issues into the conversation.  But there seems to be space for all of that,  and so what I want to take away from all of these discussions  is how can we create meaningful alliances, and be allies,  and how can we collaborate between groups  who are distinct and different, and face similar challenges  in this society, but also have really specific perspectives  and experiences, and future goals.  So the idea of collaborations, especially  among historically oppressed groups  is one that I want to continue thinking  about outside of this class.  AUDIENCE: A lot of what I was thinking about  during this class for me personally  was comparing and contrasting because I come from a very--  I'm from Zimbabwe.  So there's not a lot of diversity,  and this is an entirely new experience to me,  so a lot of what I were doing was  comparing my past, my history, my experiences  with you guys experiences and everything around me,  and thinking about for instance, in the readings  how they analyzed different situations,  the situation in America, the situation in Haiti.  And thinking about where these things are connected  how they are different.  What could have been done what should be done?  And I think I rarely thought about issues like this  before this class, and now I'm starting  to think about it more, especially in education.  I'm really interested in education, and how we can help  teach people in the future how to use their skills that they  learn, how to think about, how to approach certain problems  in a way that challenges them, and also challenges the status  quo, and challenges the hierarchies that are set up.  So personally, I think that this class definitely  helped me think a lot more, and I  hope that in future it will help a lot more people think  about their actions, think about what they're saying,  think about what they're doing, and think  about how they can help and how they  can engage their communities.  For instance, I remember when we're  talking about how we came to MIT we might graduate,  and then what are we going to do would we  go back to the communities where we come from?  How we are going-- how do you plan  to affect those communities?  Do you go back as experts, or do we go back as one of them,  do we to fit in?  Questions like that are definitely  things that we should think about, and I think  are very important.  AUDIENCE: Yeah I think the biggest thing  for me was learning about what we were learning,  but then thinking back to how I grew up in a really white area,  and I was always taught there is one correct way to speak,  there is like one correct way to teach kids.  And thinking back now with all this information  how damaging that really is, and how it it's  not really about the language, and it's not really about  how we speak it's more about marginalizing groups  that might speak that way.  And it's just thinking about how my entire school system was  based on what they thought was correct, and was telling us  what we should think is correct, and I  think coming out of this hopefully  we can try to change some of that in the school systems  because it can really affect how kids  view the world as they grow up.  AUDIENCE: I think one thing I gained from this class  is, I guess, verification of the idea that listening is very  important, and there's kind of various ways  you can think about it.  Just in the context of this class,  whether it's listening to other people share their experiences,  and really taking in and understanding  how they fit in within whatever social hierarchy,  or whatever kind of issue we're discussing.  And seeing how it's kind of played a role in their lives,  and kind of seeing how you could apply it to either better  someone else's life, improve your own interaction  with the world in some way.  Or whether it's listening in terms of language.  We talked a lot about language and how  certain modes of speaking are somewhat marginalized.  So ensuring that as you go forward you really  listen to people regardless of how they present their ideas,  or present their thoughts, or whether it's  listening as far as engaging people who  have opposing opinions as you.  Really understanding that in order  to strengthen your own positions,  and really understand why it is that you think the way it is.  You have to be able to listen to people who think  in a different way than you.  So yeah, I've just seen a lot of different things  in this class that speaks to the importance of listening.  AUDIENCE: I think what this class  has made me call into question a lot is my lack of analysis  of my racial background because I'm Japanese-American.  It's not really something that I'm  forced to address all the time because no one's really calling  that much attention to it because neither one  of those groups is really that attacked in modern society  for being a racial group.  And something I didn't really even think,  my mom is an immigrant.  I didn't really address that ever  because no one was calling in to question her immigration here.  And that also leads to a lot relating  to how the opinions of other people, and especially  my very conservative extended family,  and how their opinions about certain things  such as immigration are relying on people being  of certain races, and being from certain places because it  isn't something that they've ever seen negatively  about my family.  But it is something that's a cornerstone of why  my family exists.  So I think things like that, having people address  their own identities, and their own backgrounds  and how that's affected how they see  everything else in their interactions with other people  I think is a really great part of this course.  AUDIENCE: I'm having trouble just to lay everything down,  but I guess one big takeaway from this class  was accepting that there is no one right  way to exist as a human across individuality, race, and class,  and things like that.  And that was a realization that I  think I came to in this class.  And it all goes back to the importance  of interrogating your beliefs, and why  you think the ways that you do.  And it's really eye-opening and I think  that it's really important.  You have to open yourself up to that  and it takes a certain level of vulnerability.  I wasn't expecting to come out in this class at all,  but I did because this was a place where I felt safe,  and it was really surprising that I felt  so safe in this environment.  And I think that's something we need to recreate elsewhere.  A lot of people I would like to take for this in the future  is therapy who are seniors taking this class,  what do you do now?  What class do you take next, or what actions  can you take because of what you've learned in this class?  I think something that maybe they  could have it in this is thinking about concrete ways  to actually do stuff.  Because we had Professor Chomsky in here on Tuesday and he said,  almost anything, is the answer to what do we do.  So maybe having some sort of an initiative  coming out of this class is to make tape just  at MIT for just impulsive [inaudible]..  AUDIENCE: So kind of piggybacking off  of what Chris said, I think the most  those meaningful conversations and talks  that we've had for me, where when we talked to professors,  people all over Cambridge who were using  their own backgrounds, their own field of study,  and they're making tangible changes.  It's Christmas day.  So for example, when we watch the virtual reality  kind of simulation in terms of the Israeli-Palestinian  conflict.  And I feel like those conversations and the fact  that I have had the privilege of taking  this class in my semester has really kind of driven me  to really to take action outside of MIT,  and hopefully in the future back at MIT.  And to really take that with me in my specific field  of medicine, and how these various identities can really  affect people's health care, and that's life or death.  And so I feel like that is really been eye-opening for me  and that's driven me to action.  AUDIENCE: Yeah, I think for me, from this class  has made me more aware of how many things they go through.  Compared to what I didn't know about the Haitian Revolution  as it occurred.  And I didn't really know how to question during the time.  But it's all things that we are taught just  because a lot the history that we  learn is taught from a very westernized perspective.  So I feel like it's very important  that this class teaches that there's always many ways  to view certain things, and there's many things that aren't  necessarily taught just because society just doesn't want us  to know about these things, so that we  could learn from this, yeah.  AUDIENCE: I think similar to what Hermann was saying,  I think this class is really about the idea  of taking action.  In a lot our readings passivity was just there all the time.  People I remember it, the need to settle down,  or afternoon it's just like, oh that's really strange  but I guess the way things are.  He noticed that things were wrong but he didn't anything,  so I think just trying to take action,  and Megan you mentioned interrogating yourself  is an important way to do it.  And I really liked first assignment,  which was the linguistic autobiography,  and I felt that just thinking of my whole life in terms  of the languages I grew up with, reading, writing,  and how they were presented to me  was a really good way just to look into my own self.  What I think would have been, would be better,  in future versions of class would be maybe talking together  in smaller groups.  Would be harder.  I guess I think it's just easier just  to talk about yourself that way for some people  are more comfortable, I think.  The only time we got to that was last Tuesday we  had Professor Olive ub here, and we worked in groups of three,  and that was really cool.  AUDIENCE: OK, thank you, thank you.  I think so what's adjusted also, you mean like a [inaudible]..  So what Chris said we can try together  because this class I hope will be often many,  many, many, many times again here, [inaudible] I hope.  Actually thinking of next year, I might do it with [inaudible]..  So from that perspective maybe you guys  could share with me what you think  will be done to implement what you guys think  in terms of taking this knowledge into action.  Because throughout the semester I  was struggling with what kind of project do I assign?  Because I often felt that it would  be so nice to do a project that puts you guys in the world,  not just writing an essay.  And I try to see what--  Something could come up spontaneously  from you that could bond in to out of space.  So how would you advise me in next cycle of this course  to make that happen?  To do projects, maybe throughout the semester only  or optional projects that would really  turn knowledge into action?  OK so it's getting that, and then that.  AUDIENCE: So, maybe some things--  I still think you should have the essays because  at least for me they were pretty beneficial in exploring myself,  but maybe instead of having the essay revision,  although I think revising essays is important,  I think that can be done throughout your essay process  instead.  And maybe like putting in a project where  you have to create a policy, or like a lesson plan,  or something like that, and then present that.  And maybe even have a plan of action of who you  would go to talk to about this?  I think if you just come up with a plan it  can be pretty philosophical, or just an idea  and will never be done with it, what  would be your next step now you have an idea,  how do you implement it?  And then also, something I forgot mention before,  but I thought I was really useful about this class  was when we went to go to the movies  all together on a Saturday.  At first I was like, oh crap, now I have to like allot time,  but I actually really enjoyed that  and was hoping the conversation would keep going.  So maybe having more things outside the class,  because I think it's really hard to explore all the things  that we want to do in an hour and a half.  So maybe having somewhere--  I don't know what types of places  you can go to-- but maybe going to an inner city  school in Boston together, and seeing how it's taught there,  and what you would change?  MICHEL DEGRAFF: OK, that's good to hear actually  because one thing I'm toying with the Fox, Mr. Harald,  is to see whether we could change the format, instead  having a hour and a half to add once a week from three hours.  In the past I tried that because of the schedule for MIT  it's hard for students to enroll with a three hour class.  when they graduate.  So we stepped away from that, but now  I don't whether we should do that.  In admitting with three hours we could go someplace else.  AUDIENCE: Yeah, I that might be beneficial.  I know negotiation at Sloan does it at Thursday at 5:00  or something like that.  So it's hard to schedule a three hour class during the day,  but if you do it as a night session.  MICHEL DEGRAFF: OK, OK, OK.  Thank you for saying that Alisa?  I will report back to Colton and see what--  So it goes Dana, then Sarah then Jackie.  AUDIENCE: Well its related directly  she just said about time--  MICHEL DEGRAFF: OK, OK.  AUDIENCE: It's just like a short thing,  but having a class at 5:00 would be difficult  because there is a lot of athletes  who participate because they practice from 5:00 to 7:00.  MICHEL DEGRAFF: I see, I see, OK.  AUDIENCE: Yeah there's another section at 7:00  I'm pretty sure.  So.  AUDIENCE: Closing class are from 7:00 to 10:00.  MICHEL DEGRAFF: 7:00 to 10:00, yeah.  AUDIENCE: Yeah.  MICHEL DEGRAFF: OK.  AUDIENCE: Yeah we were talking about projects.  And I think that could definitely work in this course,  and I think one thing that I've really wanted  is to be able to affect change in this--  within the context of this course and sort of have  a reason to do so based on everyday's--  I would like to go into school and say,  let me try my at teaching kids in this way  and see if it actually works there.  So if you wanted to organize that sort of thing  it could be cool to also work in small groups  and we diversify the--  I mean we have a ton of courses in here,  but I think there's a lot of working, going out  into the real world and I think--  I mean this is just me agreeing.  I think a three hour course could be good.  MICHEL DEGRAFF: OK.  Sarah?  AUDIENCE: So I just think add stems  from what Colin said about talking  to someone with a different ideological perspective  than yourself, so maybe having students  go in groups of two [inaudible] out into world and maybe  interview someone, or share some of the information  about the Haitian Revolution should have,  it was like one of visionary revolutions to have.  [interposing voices]  MICHEL DEGRAFF: Yeah, yeah.  AUDIENCE: Something along those lines.  MICHEL DEGRAFF: OK, OK, OK.  So going back to the last point.  So in terms of going into the schools  I have some good news, which is that, I  think I should have [inaudible] with you about this new program  that has been launched in the Boston public school,  this new program.  And Vindlam Khan actually she's I think Chinese,  and she actually, she launched-- she had launched  the program in Chinese and English  can be introduced as going reasonable well,  from what I hear.  And then she's also responsible launching this Creole  to English learning program.  And she has offered that if there  are students in this class and other classes  at MIT if they want to come and volunteer, and take advantage  of that new program in terms of doing research that's  socially based, or empirically based,  or even like [inaudible].  Measuring students learning games  she would be happy to work with you.  There's one student in the other class  posted it's [inaudible] with the [inaudible] twice, and was  to be going on a weekly basis to the meetings who try understand  how they are creating this new program where there would be  I think half kids who speak creole and half who don't speak  creole.  And this would be truly bilingual,  so you get American or other of these kids learning creole  and get the Haitian creole kids.  We've got to include both the English and bigger English,  so I think it's really I think very radical move  for the government school.  They've had other programs of that sort  but never one involving the non-imperial language.  Typically it's Spanish-English, French-English,  Chinese-English, but it's the first time  that they are doing one that includes  a language like Haitian Creole that's been over the years  as you know [inaudible] history.  So we're excited, we've hit some push back  including push back back from Haitian parents, some of them  would prefer to have it in French, as you can imagine.  They don't speak French, it's a difficult neo-colonial  [inaudible] into an imperial language, so to speak.  But I think there has been some good progress on that front.  Noam Chomsky was here, Tuesday he  had an interview which I put on my Facebook page--  I can show it to you-- where it goes me,  him, and I think that's [inaudible] together  from Mexico, but he grew up in California.  And this was a very interesting exchange between the two of us.  Where Chomsky might be important of promoting these so  called [inaudible] support for really  of duration of the [inaudible].  So, I think those are good suggestions,  those are very good suggestions.  And since Harald is from a background in computation,  and as we saw doing the project on involving virtual reality  that might be another part where we can do action in the course.  AUDIENCE: With the-- just based off like the Fox Harald  computation part, I thought it was really interesting learning  about what he was doing.  I think if there was--  but I don't know if this is where you're going, but it.  I think there was a more of a requirement  to do more computation based things I probably would  straight away from this class.  MICHEL DEGRAFF: OK.  AUDIENCE: Because, so I'm not like the stereotypical major  here, I'm a business major, I think  I would been slightly intimidated if there  was a CMS type project in here.  So maybe making that one of the facets of what you can do,  but not a requirement.  MICHEL DEGRAFF: OK, that's OK.  AUDIENCE: Yeah.  MICHEL DEGRAFF: Yeah, good for you, thank you.  AUDIENCE: Yeah.  CYNTHIA: I think also taking advantage of the learning  styles of the students in the class could be interesting.  So maybe doing more creative projects,  or doing projects that people feel  like allows them to use their best skills  and actually have fun I feel like--  MICHEL DEGRAFF: So tell me Cynthia if you could  a project that was creative what would you have done?  Just to the extent of what you could think of in the future?  CYNTHIA: Just off the fly I maybe would  have made a fucking 10 foot tall papier-mache person  and written stuff all over it and then put it in lobby 10.  MICHEL DEGRAFF: OK, OK.  AUDIENCE: Like negative comments or like--  CYNTHIA: Anything, just like stuff that's interesting.  MICHEL DEGRAFF: OK, and then they  would have to the part that includes communication  of some sort.  So how would do that, so you do that  and have a paper describing why you did it,  the mission of what you've done and the objective  it's trying to accomplish?  CYNTHIA: I mean if it just like a black body  or like a brown body of some sort  I would even just to leave markers and stuff  for other people to put messaging on it  I feel like would be giving--  I think art is a great way to give people  an entry into having this conversation.  It would be an artifact.  MICHEL DEGRAFF: Excellent, excellent I'm  so glad this is being recorded so that way we have this.  No really, so that way we have this--  I can watch it with Fox, Carol and we  then we can play around with the idea, it's great too.  Actually, anyone has concrete suggestions like that?  So they told you--  AUDIENCE: So my class one of those I don't-- maybe  you've taken it, Psychology of Gender and Race?  No?  OK.  This [inaudible] psychologist who works in local area,  I think her first name is Shiby I forget her last name.  But part of the class is training or doing mock training  on how do you present cultural awareness presentations.  Where you go with--  you basically form a group of students  and kind of teach the other students her role play  and how to college frat, members of a college frat  or sixth graders out of a local Boston public school  about how some things that they could be doing  may be disparaging to minority groups,  and it could be interesting having a conversation with her  to see what things she incorporates  into those presentations and if that would be  useful inside of Black Matters.  MICHEL DEGRAFF: OK, that would be useful, be very useful.  Dana?  No I was-- I'm done.  MICHEL DEGRAFF: OK.  [laughter]  AUDIENCE: With the wiki that I think  was a new thing this semester, I think,  it's another way for us to communicate as students,  it would be great because just maybe someone  said something to you that was really interesting  and you only have their email.  MICHEL DEGRAFF: Right.  AUDIENCE: It's hard to get in contact so maybe an opt-in way  to have--  MICHEL DEGRAFF: So the wiki didn't really work, huh?  Why does the wiki not work?  AUDIENCE: It's hard.  AUDIENCE: It's not a good platform.  MICHEL DEGRAFF: The wiki is not a good platform,  all because we have you here.  [laughter] The wiki not a good platform,  I heard that as well in my other class, the students say,  we don't like the wiki.  AUDIENCE: Yeah.  AUDIENCE: Yeah.  [interposing voices]  AUDIENCE: What about like a Slack Channel or something  like where you be more--  [interposing voices]  AUDIENCE: Or like a Facebook, something that we already  all use and wouldn't have to go out our way to use.  AUDIENCE: Yeah.  AUDIENCE: Yeah.  MICHEL DEGRAFF: Who had their hand raised?  Was there a hand raised over here?  Was it Shope, was your hand raised?  Oh, OK.  AUDIENCE: Yeah sure.  So first, you were asking what kind of projects right?  So from the teaching perspective,  I think after the classes last week I'm  learning about open and fixed mindset.  Something that would have been interesting  as the project would be to create a curriculum, just  a lecture or a workshop for an age group, whatever age,  it could be college, it could be lower  and try to implement the like teaching  techniques that we learned to foster a more open mindset.  That would have been a school project to explore.  MICHEL DEGRAFF: OK, great.  OK so, Fenny, Dana and Edna.  AUDIENCE: But mine is off of that.  MICHEL DEGRAFF: OK.  AUDIENCE: OK, so I think that would be a good idea.  Also we can still enlist the help of the professors who made  these lectures because I think that will give us  a little more--  when we actually go into these schools  and say we'd like to bring this plan to you because have  professor backing, we have this whole slew  of research behind us.  AUDIENCE: Another cool thing that you could do about  community outreach, is I know one time a couple weeks ago  in Amphibious Achievement we had a bunch of people from  Chocolate City come in, and also it's--  there's a group-- it's like something something Latinas.  And I don't know--  [interposing voices]  Yes!  And so they came in and Chocolate City came in and--  AUDIENCE: But you have to give some background  about Chocolate City and Amphibious Achievement,  make it self-contained.  [interposing voices]  So Amphibious Achievement is we-- it's a program at MIT  and we work with Boston public high schoolers  and it's an academic mentorship program,  but also we just work with them to try  to build their confidence, and we also  help them apply to college, and things like that.  But, and then Chocolate City is just like it's a living group  here on campus, and it's African-American men and then--  say it again?  AUDIENCE: Mujeres Latinas.  AUDIENCE: That's a--  [laughter]  AUDIENCE: --group of Latina women,  and so they came in to talk to the high schoolers  in Amphibious Achievement and we just had a discussion about how  they feel about what they've been told they can and cannot  do because of who they are.  And it was really, really interesting for everybody.  And I think that would be something cool to do--  MICHEL DEGRAFF: Do you have a Facebook page?  AUDIENCE: We do, it's called Amphibious Achievement.  MICHEL DEGRAFF: Right.  That's great.  Thank you, thank you.  Actually, so which Facebook would be a better way  to communicate instead the wiki.  AUDIENCE: Yeah, yeah way better.  MICHEL DEGRAFF: Way better.  So maybe next year we create a Facebook page for the course.  AUDIENCE: Yeah, a page for the course  and then a messaging group for the students.  OK, OK.  MICHEL DEGRAFF: OK, OK that was good idea, good idea.  All right.  I should maybe [inaudible] a page,  a Facebook page for this group, and that way you guys  can keep in touch.  And if there are ways that--  even what [inaudible] has explained  and then we should do other projects that  might bring your strength and your knowledge together  to bring actual change, that might be  something we could figure out.  But you would have be responsible for it.  Colin?  AUDIENCE: Bouncing off of your idea here,  I think it would be really interesting to actually  have one part of that would be a [inaudible] support  literacy class, or presentation or something like that.  Where you going to take a certain section of literature,  maybe just one book like Madam Bovary,  and dissect the ways in which the society in which it  is embedded create the themes within it.  A major thing inside of Madam Bovary  is centered on this one woman who's  married in countryside of France back in 1900s or 1800s,  and she gets really depressed because she has nothing to do.  And just explaining that she has no options for employment,  and is stuck at home because that's what was expected  of women back in that day.  And dissecting both that cultural phenomenon  and then examining how that may play out in today's terms  with different patterns in society.  MICHEL DEGRAFF: OK, good, goo.  SO a statistic fact, you may have the last word.  AUDIENCE: Wow, OK.  So something that I was thinking about  was what you had about having an art project,  and I realized I'm not artistic at all, so I was trying  to figure out what I would do if there was an art assignment.  And I was thinking about something that's in a show,  where like you put yourself up, you stand up there  and then you have a projector screen,  and you write words on it of what  you don't like about yourself.  And that could be instead of what  we don't like of ourselves, things  we've been told about ourselves based of our race, or gender,  or sexuality, and also having things you would rather  have been said, because what I really liked about this class  was the self-exploration, so.  MICHEL DEGRAFF: Good, good.  All right guys so thank you so much. 