 MARKUS KLUTE: Welcome back to Special Relativity, 8.20.  In this section, we're going to talk about proper velocity.  We have seen already concepts of proper time and proper length  as the time and the space as seen  in the object's own reference frame.  So now we want to try to find something similar  for velocities, as we have seen the Lorentz  transformation applied to velocities  of a quite difficult form.  As a reminder, velocity is given as a change  in space of a change in time.  We have seen the Lorentz transformation of a velocity x  in a reference frame which is boosted in the same direction  x.  And you see that this new velocity x prime  is given by new x minus v. So there's  a velocity addition going on, which  is corrected then by this factor 1 minus uxv over c squared.  You've also seen that even so, the boost is in x direction.  There's also modification of the velocity in y direction  and in z direction.  OK?  So you see that basically, there is this--  the velocity itself is corrected with this new factor.  Note here that there is a special case  in which the direct-- the velocity in x direction  is equal to 0.  Think about this object being in its own rest frame,  again, where the velocity in the booth direction is 0.  You see that both equations simplify  for ux prime that would be simply equal to minus v,  where uy prime would be uy prime and uv prime would be uv.  So let's try to get at it.  Let's try to express velocities in terms of the proper time,  at the time as it ticks in the object reference frame.  So we have seen that the time is given by gamma times  the time in the rest frame or time in the proper--  times gamma times the proper time.  Note here that we have two different gamma  factors to play with.  One is a gamma factor of the Lorentz transformation.  And this gamma here is the gamma using  the speed of the object in a specific reference frame.  So this is the gamma which is a gamma factor which  is a gamma of v of the velocity or the speed of the object.  And now we can just simply define proper velocity  if I use this vector eta here, which is a four vector, which  is the derivative of the spatial component with the proper time.  And when we do this, you find this relatively simple solution  of gamma times c for the 0's component, gamma times ux,  gamma times uy, and gamma times uz for the last component.  So the question now is, we defined this new velocity  of an object where the time of the object  ticks in its own reference frame using  this property as proper time.  OK?  If we now try a Lorentz transformation on this,  we can simply apply the matrix for Lorentz transformation  on this four vector and find the solution here.  You can see that this is consistent by doing  this with the original components in this proper time  as well.  You see that those actually are a consistent answer.  It makes a lot of sense. 