 [SQUEAKING]  [RUSTLING]  [CLICKING]  CLAIRE HALLORAN: Today, we're going  to be doing goody bag 1, atoms and reactions.  Our objectives today are to identify material  based on its properties, observe a simple chemical reaction,  and identify the limiting reagent,  and estimate the number of atoms in a real object.  To do this goody bag, you'll need vinegar, a plastic cup,  a ruler, metal samples of aluminum, copper, iron,  magnesium, and tin, but if you can only  get copper and magnesium, it will work, and a pipette.  Some conceptual questions to think about  while you're doing this goody bag are,  how can we tell different metals apart,  and how can we count atoms that are too small to see?  First, we have five samples of metal  that we would like to identify using their properties.  The easiest to identify is copper by its orange-ish color.  Next, we're going to try to find out  which sample is iron by testing how easy they are to bend.  Iron will be the most difficult to bend.  So this sample bends very easily just with my fingers,  so it must not be iron.  This sample is very difficult. I can hardly  get it to bend at all with my fingers,  and this sample also bends fairly easily just  using my fingers.  So we know that this sample, the hardest to bend, must be iron.  Next, we're going to try to compare the density  of these different metals.  So this metal feels the heaviest and most dense.  This one's feels lighter, and this sample  feels light as well.  So we know that tin is the most dense metal,  so this sample must be tin.  To identify which of these samples is magnesium  and which of them is aluminum, we're  going to test which one of them reacts with vinegar.  So we're going to place each of these samples  on the lid of our plastic cup to make  sure we don't spill any of the vinegar  and use our pipette to put a drop of vinegar  on each of the samples, and the one that reacts  will be magnesium, because we know magnesium reacts  with vinegar watch closely.  It doesn't look like we're getting any reaction  from this metal, so it must be the aluminum  now, let's try the other.  You can see that this material's forming tiny bubbles after we  put the vinegar on it, so it must be magnesium.  Those bubbles are hydrogen gas.  Now, that the bubbling has stopped on our magnesium,  we note that the reaction is over.  There's still plenty of magnesium left,  so this indicates that the acetic acid inside  of the vinegar must be the limiting reagent.  Finally, we want to estimate how many atoms  are in our sample of copper.  To do so, we're going to use a ruler.  Using our ruler, we can measure the width and the height  of this copper sample.  So using the metric side of our ruler,  we align the 0 with the edge of our material  and see that it is about 13 millimeter wide and 25  millimeter long.  Today, we did goody bag 1.  We identified our metal samples based on their material  properties, we observed a simple reaction  and identified the limiting reagent,  and we measured our copper to estimate the number of atoms  in our sample. 