 The following content is provided under a Creative  Commons license.  Your support will help MIT OpenCourseWare  continue to offer high quality educational resources for free.  To make a donation or to view additional materials  from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT OpenCourseWare  at ocw.mit.edu.  PROFESSOR: OK, so this is the second part of the class,  and this is the last part of the semester.  So I think we've traveled a lot.  You know, we've seen so many difficult issues, I think.  And I want to give you credit for, throughout this semester,  for being so open, honest, and being able to engage  in difficult issues.  And each time that you guys are presenting,  you might remember me nagging you  to get deeper into personal issues  and not just the abstract.  And the reason is because, I think  you make a better case for whatever you  want to argue when you read your own biography into it.  And I think overall it worked.  I myself, you know, learned so much throughout the semester  from listening to some of your own personal discoveries  about yourself, about issues of race, language, gender,  sexuality.  And I give you lots of credit for that.  It's risky.  And because before you came here you  didn't know each other, obviously, right?  And yet to be able to open yourself to difficult questions  and to give answers that were so thoughtful and so--  many of them, I think, I didn't expect some of you  would, you know, literally come out in this class, in a way,  right?  So I thought that was very brave of you.  So I give you my respect for that.  So with that coming to end, [INAUDIBLE]..  [LAUGH]  So we can-- let's do [INAUDIBLE] that many--  if there are things that you feel  you will take with you to the next step,  or that you feel that others who come after you in this class  might benefit from, anything you want to share of your learning  experience in this class.  And how you think you can bridge those  gaps that we've seen, either in our societies or families.  So I wasn't here last Thursday, but I watched the video  before class.  And there too, like I was actually very impressed  by how you guys brought up personal issues.  But there is a lot there to work on.  So [INAUDIBLE].  For this class, for these last 40 minutes or so,  you can have a big something to bring out.  What would it be?  You ready to get past?  We can go to [? Edna. ?]  AUDIENCE: It's quicker with words.  Better.  PROFESSOR: Yeah.  [LAUGHTER]  AUDIENCE: So I'm not sure if I fully  understand what I'm supposed to say,  but I'll say what I was thinking.  So for me personally throughout this class,  I think I realized I like explored myself and my identity  way more, and I think I was supposed to ask questions about  myself that I hadn't.  And for me, the main thing I realized  is like, how uncomfortable I am with being multiracial.  Like I enjoy being multiracial, but I  realize that there's parts of me like that don't really  fit together, and how like I don't really see myself  as one certain race or ever.  And I think, you know, the things that helped with that  were like, you know, our personal essays,  and like definitely the free writing  assignments that one of the guest professors had us do.  Like that got pretty deep.  And like I was kind of like, oh, crap,  I have to write at like 9:30 in the morning  when she first said that.  But then like I really enjoyed it as it went on.  And I think like maybe bringing out  more multiracial topics next year  would be beneficial to people like me,  like who didn't know that was like a problem with themselves.  And I think like also a really interesting topic  that we went over was like--  I think what do we call, fake-- no, passing.  Passing.  And like how that's a privilege and like  talking about all the controversial issues on that.  And I think I really also thought  about that for this class.  So that's something I benefited from.  PROFESSOR: Yeah.  So you said faking instead of passing.  And that remind me of a comment that Cynthia made back then,  right?  That often when we think of passing we  think of it as something which is negative.  But I think [INAUDIBLE] that point, which I knew very well.  It was very important that the notion of passing  should not be seen from that perspective.  And there's a way that one can think  of passing as a normal survival strategy, in a way.  So I think we ought to think of it like-- you  don't have to talk about that.  But you can--  [LAUGH]  AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE]  PROFESSOR: Say it again?  AUDIENCE: Nothing's-- can I have another moment?  PROFESSOR: Sure, of course.  We can go to [? Burke ?] and then come back.  [LAUGHTER]  AUDIENCE: So I guess in terms of our,  I think, it takes a lot of reflecting and trying to think  about all that we've discussed.  But just sort of a quick note.  One of the things that this class has sort of solidified  for me is the importance of conversations.  And so I think most of the learning that I've  done in this class and other sort of seminar based classes  sort of pales in comparison-- or what  I learned in my technical courses  pales in comparison to the things  that I've learned in classes like this.  Because at the end of the day, I think most of the learning  comes from those around you, your classmates, the set  of experiences that they have, more so than what you learn  in these technical classes.  There's a saying that says like, five years after you graduate,  you won't remember 90% or whatever of what  you learned in college.  But I think what you do remember is  these sort of conversations that boil down  to personal experiences.  And so I think, again, there is challenge  in this world of sort of approaching  people who aren't really willing to have these conversations.  But sort of changing yourself is the first step.  And I think if everyone sort of makes or has this realization,  takes a step towards making this change, it's very idealistic.  But I think the world would be a better place.  I think that's probably one thing that I've  gotten from this class.  AUDIENCE: Whoa, man.  Bouncing off what [? Burke ?] said,  I think one way which I'd like to see this class grow  is the integration of having some sort of conversation,  like open discussion instead of debate,  with someone who does not come from a similar theological  or ideological background as most people in this class  to try to see--  to sort of gain practice in having discussions  with someone who's a lot different from you  and developing a common trust and coming  to see each other's viewpoints in a way that  would be more informative than what  one could do among a set of like-minded individuals.  AUDIENCE: So one thing that I enjoyed about this class,  I can distinctly remember one class that  literally blew my mind.  I think I turned to somebody and was like, oh my gosh.  And that was when we interrogated  what MIT was as an institution and where we sit  in this hierarchy of social--  in the social hierarchy in the US.  And I think coming to MIT I was willing to give the institution  a free pass a lot because I felt that I was getting  a lot from the experience.  But I think now that I'm a senior  and all the seniors here are-- last day of classes, you guys.  Now that I'm at this point where I can think back  on what MIT has done for me and what and how it functions,  I think I'm better poised to think more critically  about the institutions I choose to join  in the future for postgraduate education and after.  AUDIENCE: So I took this class as a challenge to myself.  Because at the beginning, I knew about the prejudices  and stereotypes that I had been taught  and I wanted to get rid of them.  And I think this class has helped a lot with that  just by hearing everyone else's perspectives from the readings,  from looking at the world--  by taking a step back and looking at things as they are  and not how we were specifically taught that they are.  And I really appreciate that.  I want to, from here on, move forward  and try to figure out how to be an ally  from an Asian-American perspective.  Because a lot of the times, Asian-American families  try to be the status quo.  Like my parents have always taught me to like  try to be, not explicitly, but implicitly  try to be as white as you can.  And I think that that was a really difficult lesson  to go through and then come to a place like MIT which  is so diverse and which has so many different backgrounds.  And to like come in thinking there's a hierarchy where  there isn't, and now going forward  trying to break that down.  AUDIENCE: A lot of what I was thinking about  during this class for me personally,  was comparing and contrasting.  Because I come from a very--  I'm from Zimbabwe, so there's not a lot of diversity.  And this is an entirely new experience to me.  So a lot of what I was doing was comparing my past, my history,  my experiences, with you guys' experiences  and everything around me.  And thinking about, for instance, in the readings,  how they analyze different situations, the situation  in America, the situation in Haiti,  and thinking about where these things are connected,  how they're different.  What could have been done?  What should be done?  And I think--  I really thought about issues like this before this class,  and now I'm starting to think about it more.  Especially in education, I'm really interested in education  and how we can help teach people in the future  how to use this skill that they learn,  how to think about certain things,  how to approach certain problems in a way that challenges  them and also challenges the status quo  and challenges the hierarchies that are set up.  So personally I think that that this class definitely  helped me think a lot more, and I  hope that in future will help a lot more people think  about their actions, think about what they're saying,  think about what they're doing, and think  about how they can help and how they  can engage their communities.  For instance, I remember when we're  talking about how we came to MIT and we might graduate,  and then what are you going to do  when you go back to the communities where we come from?  How do you plan to affect those communities?  Do we go back as experts or do we go back as one of them?  Do we try to fit in?  Like questions like that are definitely  things that we should think about and I think  are very important.  AUDIENCE: Yeah, I think the biggest thing  for me was like learning about what we were learning,  but then thinking back to how I grew up  in like a really white area.  And I was always taught like there  is one correct way to speak, there  is like one correct way to teach kids.  And thinking back now, with all this information  on how damaging that really is and how it's not really  about the language and it's not really about how we speak.  It's more about marginalizing groups  that might speak that way.  And it's like just thinking about how my entire school  system was based on like what they thought was correct  and was telling us what we should think is correct.  And I think coming out of this hopefully  we can try to change some of that in the school systems.  Because it can really affect how kids view the world as they  grow up.  AUDIENCE: I think one thing I gained from this class  is kind of, I guess, verification of the idea  that listening is very important.  And it's kind of various ways you  could think about it like just in the context of this class,  whether it's like listening to like other people share  their experiences and kind of really taking it in  and understanding like how they fit in  within whatever social hierarchy or whatever kind of issue  we're discussing and seeing how it's kind of played  a role in their lives.  And kind of seeing how you could apply it to either better  someone else's life, like improve  your own kind of interaction with the world in some way.  Or whether it's listening in terms of like language.  You talked a lot about language and kind  of how certain modes of speaking are somewhat marginalized.  So ensuring that as you go forward you really  listen to people regardless of how they present their ideas  or present their thoughts.  Or whether it's like listening as far as engaging people who  have opposing opinions as you.  Like really understanding that in order  to strengthen your own positions and really understand  why it is that you think the way it is,  you have to be able to listen to people who kind of think  in a different way than you.  So yeah, I've just seen a lot of kind of different things  in this class that speaks of importance of listening.  AUDIENCE: I think what this class has really  called into question a lot is this lack of analysis  of my racial background.  Because I'm Japanese-American it's  not really something that I'm forced to address all the time,  because no one's really calling that much attention to it.  Because neither one of those groups is really  that attacked in modern society for being a racial group.  And something I didn't really think about  is like, my mom is an immigrant.  I didn't really address that ever  because no one was calling to question her immigration here.  And that also leads to a lot of like relating  to the opinions of other people, and especially  like my very conservative extended family  and how their opinions about certain things  such as immigration are reliant on people  being of certain races and being from certain places.  Because it just [? poisons ?] something that  they've ever seen negatively about my family,  but it is something that's the core of why my family exists.  So I think things like that, like having people address  their own identities and their own backgrounds  and how that's affected how they see  everything else and their interaction with other people,  I think is a really great part of this course.  AUDIENCE: I'm having trouble distilling everything down,  but I guess one big takeaway from this class  was accepting that there is no one right  way to exist as a human across like gender, sexuality, race,  class, and things like that.  And that was a realization that I  think I came to in this class.  And it all goes back to the importance  of interrogating your beliefs and why  you think the ways that you do.  And it's really eye-opening and I  think that's really important to have to open yourself up  to that.  And it takes like a certain level of vulnerability.  Like I wasn't expecting to come out in this class at all.  But I did, because this was a place where I felt safe  and it was like really surprising  that I felt so safe in this environment.  And I think that's something that we  need to recreate elsewhere.  Another thing that I would like to take  for this class in the future is like, there  are people that aren't seniors taking this class, so  like what do you do now?  What classes do you take next?  Or what actions can you take because of what  you've learned in this class?  And I think something that maybe can happen in this class  is thinking about concrete ways to actually do stuff.  Because you had Professor Chomsky here on Tuesday  and he said, almost anything is the answer  to like, what do we do?  So maybe having some sort of initiative  coming out of this class to make change maybe just  at MIT or just like in class [INAUDIBLE]..  AUDIENCE: So kind of piggybacking off  of what [? Chris said, ?] I think the most  meaningful conversations and talks  that we've had for me were when we talked to professors, people  all over Cambridge, who were using their own backgrounds,  their own fields of study, and they're  making tangible changes, as Chris was saying.  So for example when we watch like the virtual reality  kind of simulation in terms of the Israeli-Palestinian  Conflict.  And I feel like those conversations and the fact  that I have the privilege of taking  this class in my last semester has really kind of driven me  to really take action outside of MIT,  and hopefully in the future back at MIT,  and to really take that with me in my specific field  of medicine and how these various identities can really  affect people's kind of health care.  And that's life or death.  And so I feel like that has really eye-opening for me  and that's kind of driven me to action.  AUDIENCE: Yeah.  I think for me, from this class has  made me more aware of how many things I don't do.  For example, what I didn't know about the Haitian Revolution  that occurred, and I didn't really  question it during the time.  But it's all the things that we aren't  taught just because a lot of the history that we learn  is taught from like a very Westernized perspective.  So I feel like it's very important that this class  teaches that there's always many ways to do certain things  and there's many things that aren't necessarily  [? wrong ?] just because I guess society just doesn't want  us to know about these things.  So then we go [INAUDIBLE].  AUDIENCE: I think similar to what [? Herman ?] was saying,  I think this class is really about the idea  of taking action.  And a lot of our readings like, passivity  was just there all the time.  People, I remember in [? Benito ?] [? Soreno ?] where  the captain was just like, oh, that's really strange,  but I guess that's just the way things are.  So it's like-- he noticed that things are wrong  but he didn't do anything with them.  So I think just trying to take action and--  many of you mentioned interrogating yourself  is an important way to do it.  And I really liked the first assignment, which  was a linguistic autobiography.  And I felt that just thinking of my whole life in terms  of the languages I grew up reading,  writing, and how they were presented to me,  was a really good way just to look into my own self.  What I think would be better in future versions of this class  would be maybe talking together in smaller groups.  I guess it's easier just to talk about yourself that way  for some people.  They're more comfortable, I think.  The only time we got to do that was last Tuesday.  We had Professor [? Aleman ?] here  and we worked in groups of three.  That was really cool.  PROFESSOR: OK.  Thank you.  Thank you.  I think-- so also you mean like [INAUDIBLE],, you know?  So what Chris said we can try together, because this class  I hope will be offered many, many, many, many times  again here [INAUDIBLE].  And actually we're thinking of next year  I might do with [INAUDIBLE].  So from that perspective, maybe you guys  could share with me what you think  could be done to implement what you guys said  in terms of taking this knowledge into action?  Because throughout the semester I  was struggling with what kind of projects do I assign?  Because I often felt it would be nice to do a project that  puts you guys in the world, not just writing an essay,  you know?  And I try to see whether something could come up  spontaneously from you that you'd go and say,  I will do this.  So how would you advise me in next cycle of this course  to make that happen?  You know?  To do projects maybe throughout the semester or maybe  [INAUDIBLE] or optional projects that will really turn knowledge  into action?  OK, so [? Estrella ?] and then [INAUDIBLE],, and then  [INAUDIBLE].  AUDIENCE: So maybe some things like--  I still think you should have the essays,  because at least for me they were pretty  beneficial in exploring myself.  But maybe instead of having like the essay revision-- although I  think like revising essays is important,  I think it could be done throughout your essay process  instead.  And maybe like putting in a project  where you have to create like a policy  or like a lesson plan or something like that  and then present that.  And maybe even have a plan of action of who you  would go to talk to about this.  Because I think if you just come up  with a plan it can be pretty, you know, philosophical or just  like, just an idea and it will never be done with it.  But like, what would be your next step?  Now you have an idea, how do you implement it?  And then also something I forgot to mention before I thought  was really useful about this class  was when we went to go to the movies  all together on a Saturday.  And at first I was like, oh, crap.  Now I have to like allot a lot of time.  But I actually really enjoyed that  and was hoping the conversation would keep going.  So maybe having more things outside the class.  Because I think it's really hard to explore all the things  that you want to do in an hour and a half.  So like maybe having somewhere like--  I don't know what types of places you can go to,  but maybe going to, you know, an inner city school in Boston  together and like seeing how it's taught there  and what you would change.  PROFESSOR: OK.  That's good to hear, actually, because one thing  that I'm struggling with [? Fox ?] because  of [INAUDIBLE] is to see whether we could change the format.  Instead of having an hour and a half  to having once a week for three hours.  And in the past I tried that, but because  of the schedule of MIT it's a bit hard for students  to enroll for a three hour class as an undergraduate.  So we stepped away from that.  But now we know whether we should do that,  and then maybe three hours we could go someplace else.  AUDIENCE: Yeah, I think that may be beneficial.  I know like negotiation at Sloan does it at like Thursday  at like 5:00 or something like that.  So it's hard to schedule like a three hour class  during the day, but if you do it as a night section.  PROFESSOR: OK.  OK.  OK, thank you for saying that, because I'll  report back to [? Fox ?] and we will see what [INAUDIBLE]..  So it was [? Lena ?] then [? Sarah ?] and then  [? Jackie. ?]  AUDIENCE: Well, it was related directly  to what she just said about time.  It's just like a short thing.  But having a class at 5:00 will be difficult  because like no athletes can participate.  You know, because they practice from 5:00 to 7:00.  AUDIENCE: Yeah.  There's another section at 7:00 I'm pretty sure, so.  AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE] classes from 7:00 to 10:00.  PROFESSOR: 7:00 to 10:00, yeah, OK.  AUDIENCE: Yeah.  We were talking-- [? Lena ?] was talking about projects.  And I think that could definitely work in this course.  I think one thing that I've really wanted  is to be able to effect change within the context  of this course and sort of have a reason to do so.  And based on the readings, I would like to go to into school  and say like, let me try my hand at teaching kids in this way  and see if it actually works.  So if you wanted to organize that sort of thing,  it could be cool to also work in small groups  and maybe diversify--  I mean, we have a ton of new courses in here.  But I think there's a lot to be gained by going out  into the real world.  And I think--  I mean this is just me agreeing, but I  think a three hour course would be a good decision.  PROFESSOR: OK.  [? Sarah. ?]  AUDIENCE: So I think just my idea stems  from what [? Collin ?] said about talking  with someone with a different ideological perspective  than yourself.  So maybe like having students go in like groups  of two out into the world and maybe interview someone  or share some of the information around like [INAUDIBLE]..  But if it was like one of them was revolutionary [INAUDIBLE]..  Did you ever learn?  [INAUDIBLE] Something along those lines.  PROFESSOR: OK, OK.  So going back to the last point.  So in terms of going to schools, I  have some good news, which is that I think  I shared that article with you about this new program that's  being launched in the [? bottom of ?] the school,  the [INAUDIBLE] program.  And [? Vivian ?] [? Tam, ?] actually she is ethnically  Chinese.  And she actually launched this program in Chinese-English  in Cambridge that is doing really well from what I here.  And then she's also responsible for launching  this Creole-English [? studies ?] program.  And she's offered that if they're students in this class  and other classes at MIT, they want  to come and volunteer and take advantage of that new program  in terms of doing any research that's  socially based or empirically based,  or even like to do with measuring students  learning gains, she would be happy to work with you.  There is one student in my other class, [INAUDIBLE],,  who is going to get out twice and was  going to be going on a weekly basis to the meetings  to try to understand how they're creating this new program.  We're going to be, I think, half kids who  speak Creole and half don't speak Creole,  and it's going to be truly bilingual.  So you get American or other ethnicities,  as many English and Creole, and you get each of the Creole kids  be included also learning English and developing English.  So I think it is really a very radical move  for the [? government. ?] We've had other programs of that  sort, but never one involving a [? non-imperial ?] language.  Typically it's Spanish-English, French-English,  Chinese-English.  But it's the first time that they're  doing one that includes a language like Haitian  Creole, that's been over the years, as you know,  stigmatized in various ways.  So we're excited.  We've had some pushback, including pushback  from Haitian parents, who some of them  would prefer to have it in French, as you  can imagine, right?  They don't speak French, but it's  a typical neo-colonial [INAUDIBLE]  into an superior language, so to speak.  But I think there's been some good progress on that front.  In fact, Noam Chomsky was here Tuesday.  He had an interview which I put on my Facebook page.  [? In fact, ?] [? I sent it ?] [? to you. ?] Where it was me  and him.  And I since have [INAUDIBLE] [? interview, ?]  but it was [INAUDIBLE].  But I mean it's [INAUDIBLE] as well.  It's New Mexico, but she grew up in California.  And it was a very interesting exchange between the two of us,  in terms of listening about the importance of promoting  these local languages or really collaboration  of the experience [INAUDIBLE].  So I think that this is a good suggestion.  It's a very good suggestion.  And since [? Harold ?] has some background [? participation, ?]  as you saw, with a project involving virtual reality,  that might be another part where you can do action [INAUDIBLE]..  AUDIENCE: With just based off what you said like with  the [? Fox ?] [? Harold ?] computation part,  I thought it was really interesting like learning about  what he's doing.  But I think if there was like--  I don't know if this is where you were going.  But like if I think there was a more requirement  to do more computation-based things,  like I probably would have strayed away from this class.  Because like I'm not like the stereotypical major here.  Like I'm a business major, but I think  I would've been like slightly intimidated  if there was like a CMS-type project in here.  So maybe like making that one of the facets of what you can do,  but not a requirement.  PROFESSOR: OK, I see.  OK, that's good, yeah.  Yeah, good to hear, thank you.  AUDIENCE: I think also taking advantage  of the learning styles of the students in the class  can be interesting.  So maybe doing more creative projects  or doing projects that people feel  like allow them to use their best skills  and actually have fun, I feel like.  PROFESSOR: So tell me, [? Cynthia. ?]  If you could have done a project that was creative,  what would you have done?  Just to get a sense of what we could think of in the future?  AUDIENCE: Just off the fly, I maybe would have made like  a 10-foot tall papier-mache person and written like,  I don't know, stuff all over it and put it in [? lobby ?]  [? 10. ?]  AUDIENCE: Like negative comments or like?  AUDIENCE: No, anything.  Just stuff like--  PROFESSOR: That's interesting.  OK.  And then they would have to have a part that includes  communication of some sort.  So how would you do that?  So you would do that and then perhaps have other people  describing what you did and the mission or what you've done  and the objective and [? strength that ?]  [? accompanies? ?]  AUDIENCE: I mean, if it was just like a black body  or like a brown body of some sort,  you could even just leave markers and stuff  for other people to put messaging on it  I feel like would be--  like I think art is a great way to give people  an entry into having those conversations.  And it would be an art project.  PROFESSOR: Excellent.  Excellent.  I'm so glad this is being recorded so that we have this.  No, really.  We have this I can watch it with [? Fox ?] [? Harold ?] and then  we can plan around it.  This is great.  Actually, anyone has concrete suggestions like that?  AUDIENCE: So our class is one of those--  I don't-- maybe you're taking it, psychology, gender,  and race?  No?  OK.  It's taught by a psychologist who works in the local area.  Her first name is [? Chevy. ?] I forget her last name.  But part of the class is like during mock training  on how to present cultural awareness presentations where  you go with--  you basically form a group of students  and kind of teach the other students  who are role playing as like members of a college frat  or like sixth graders out of a local Boston public school,  about like how some things that they may be doing  could be disparaging to minority groups.  And it could be interesting, having a conversation with her  to see like what things she incorporates  into those presentations, and if that  would be useful inside of [INAUDIBLE] matters.  PROFESSOR: OK, that would be useful.  Could be very useful.  [? Lena? ?]  AUDIENCE: No, I was [INAUDIBLE].  PROFESSOR: OK.  [LAUGHTER]  AUDIENCE: With the wiki that I think  was a new thing this semester, I think--  just another way for us to communicate  like as students would be great.  Because just like maybe someone said something in class  that was really interesting and you only have their email.  Like it's hard to get in contact,  so maybe another like opt-in way to have like--  PROFESSOR: So the wiki didn't really work?  AUDIENCE: No.  AUDIENCE: Nah.  PROFESSOR: Why didn't the wiki work?  AUDIENCE: It's hard.  AUDIENCE: It's not a good platform.  AUDIENCE: Yeah.  PROFESSOR: The wiki is not a good platform.  Open course review here, the wiki is not a good platform.  I heard that as well in my other class.  The students said, we don't like the wiki.  AUDIENCE: Yeah, I never used it.  AUDIENCE: It's not user-friendly.  AUDIENCE: What about like a slack channel or something,  like where you can be more communicative but also like  [INAUDIBLE]?  Or a group in like Facebook?  Like something that we already all  use and wouldn't have to go out of our way to.  Yeah.  PROFESSOR: Who had their hand raised?  Was there a hand raised over here?  Was it [? Shope? ?] Was your hand raised?  No?  OK.  [INAUDIBLE]  AUDIENCE: Yeah, sure.  So you're asking what kind of projects, right?  So from the teaching perspective,  I think after the classes last week I'm  learning about opened and fixed mindset.  Something that would have been interesting as a project  would be to create a curriculum, like just  a lecture or a workshop for an age group, whatever age.  It could be college, it could be lower.  And kind of trying to implement the like teaching  techniques that we learn to foster a more open mindset.  That would have been a cool project to explore.  PROFESSOR: OK.  OK, great.  OK, so [? Fanny, ?] [? Dana, ?] and [INAUDIBLE]..  AUDIENCE: Mine is off of that.  AUDIENCE: So you go first.  AUDIENCE: OK.  I think that would be a good idea.  Also, we could still enlist the help of the professor  for any of these lectures.  Because I think that will give us a little more, you know,  oomph when we actually go into these schools and say,  you know, we'd like to bring this plan to you.  Because we have professor backing.  We have this whole slew of research behind us.  AUDIENCE: Another cool thing that you could do about  like community outreach is--  I know one time a couple weeks ago in Amphibious Achievement  we had a bunch of people from Chocolate City come in.  And also there's a group, like something, something Latinas.  And I don't know--  AUDIENCE: Mujeres Latinas?  AUDIENCE: Yes.  So they came in and Chocolate City came in.  And--  PROFESSOR: You have to give some background about Chocolate  City and Amphibious Achievement, and make it self-contained.  AUDIENCE: Right, sorry.  PROFESSOR: So that way if people don't  know who you're referring to.  AUDIENCE: So Amphibious Achievement is--  it's a program at MIT and we work with Boston public  high schoolers.  And it's like an academic mentorship program,  but also we just like work with them  to try to build their confidence,  and we also help them apply to college and things like that.  And then Chocolate City is like just  like a living group here on campus,  and it's like African-American men.  And then-- say it again.  AUDIENCE: Mujeres Latinas.  AUDIENCE: That's a group of like Latina women.  And so they came in to talk to the high schoolers  in Amphibious Achievement, and we just had like a discussion  about how they feel about what they've been told they can  and cannot do because of like who they are.  And it was really, really interesting for everybody.  And I think that would be something cool to do.  PROFESSOR: Do you have a Facebook page?  AUDIENCE: We do.  It is called Amphibious Achievement.  [LAUGHTER]  PROFESSOR: All right.  Thank you.  Thank you.  So actually would Facebook be a better way  to communicate instead of the wiki?  AUDIENCE: Yes.  AUDIENCE: Yeah, way better.  PROFESSOR: Way better.  So maybe next year then we should create a Facebook page  for the course.  AUDIENCE: Yeah.  AUDIENCE: A page for the course, and then  a messaging group for the students.  PROFESSOR: OK, OK.  That's a good idea.  That's a good idea.  All right, maybe one of you could create a Facebook page  for this group, and that way you guys could keep in touch.  And given what [? Fanny ?] just explained,  you could do other projects combining your strengths  and others together to bring actual change.  That may be something you can do.  But you'd have to be responsible for it.  Yes.  [? Collin? ?]  AUDIENCE: Bouncing off your idea,  I think it'd be really interesting like,  noticing how one [? product ?] option would  be like an emancipatory literacy class presentation or something  like that, where you take a certain section of literature,  maybe just one book, like Madame Ovary,  and dissect the ways in which the society in which it  is embedded create the themes within it.  Like major things that are in Madame  Ovary is like centered on this one woman who  is like married in the countryside of France  back in like the 1900s or 1800s.  And she gets really depressed because she has nothing to do.  And just explaining that like, she  has no options for employment and is stuck at home  because that's what was expected of women back in that day.  And like dissecting both that cultural phenomenon  and like examining how that may play out in today's terms  with different patterns in society.  PROFESSOR: OK.  Good, good.  So it's 10:55, so we'll get [? Lena ?] the last word.  AUDIENCE: Oh, jeez.  Wow, OK.  So something that I was thinking about  was what you had said about having like an art project.  And I realized I'm not artistic at all,  so I was trying to figure out what I would do  if there was an art assignment.  And I was thinking about something that's in a show  where like you put yourself up, like you stand up there,  and then you have like a projector screen  and you write words on it of what  you don't like about yourself.  And that could be like, instead of  like what we don't like about ourselves,  like things we've been told about ourselves based  off our race or based on our gender or sexuality.  And also having things you would rather have been said.  Because what I really liked this class was the self-exploration.  PROFESSOR: All right, then.  So thank you so much.  [APPLAUSE] 