 The following content is provided under a Creative  Commons license.  Your support will help MIT OpenCourseWare  continue to offer high-quality, educational resources for free.  To make a donation or view additional materials  from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT OpenCourseWare  at ocw.mit.edu.  BOGDAN FEDELES: Hello, and welcome to 5.07 Bio Chemistry  Online.  I'm Dr. Bogdan Fedeles.  Let's metabolize some problems.  Today we're going to be talking about Problem 2  of Problem Set 4.  Here we're going to be discussing in detail  the mechanism of HMG-CoA synthase, a key enzyme  in central metabolism responsible for making the five  carbon building blocks from which  all sterols, such as cholesterol and steroid hormones are made.  HMG-CoA synthase catalyzes the following reaction.  It takes acetyl-CoA, which we're going  to encounter a lot in the central metabolism,  and combines it with acetoacetyl-CoA,  another thioester.  In this process, the one molecule of CoA is lost,  and we get the product hydroxymethylglutaryl  CoA or HMG-CoA, as you notice the initials H, M, and G are  part of this name.  To help us understand the mechanism,  a crystal structure of this HMG-CoA synthase  is provided in this problem, and it's shown here.  Question 1 of this problem is asking  us to provide a detailed curved arrow  mechanism of the reaction catalyzed  by the HMG-CoA synthase.  And for that we're going to use the information provided  in the crystal structure.  And we are also given an additional hint  and that is the acetyl CoA substrate  provides the CH2CO2 CO2 minus moiety in the HMG-CoA product.  Let's take a look.  So the hint is telling us that these two carbons, which  I'm going to label in blue from acetyl-CoA,  are, in fact, these two carbons, CH2 COO  minus in hydroxymethylglutaryl CoA.  That means that the other four carbons in the product  must be the carbons from the acetoacetyl-CoA.  Let's label these red.  So now since we have a thioester functionality in both cases,  these are probably the same, so the carbons  from a acetoacetyl-CoA are as follows.  So notice the HMG-CoA synthase, it  accomplishes the formation of a carbon-carbon bond,  and that is this bond right here.  It's between the CH3 carbon acetyl-CoA  and the carbonyl carbon of acetoacetyl-CoA.  And in the process, this carbonyl  will become a hydroxyl group.  Now, let's take a look at the crystal structure  and see what information we can gather there.  Now this is a picture of the active site  of the HMG-CoA synthase.  We notice the acetyl-CoA moiety is actually  now bound to this C111.  As you know C is a cysteine--  so it's actually covalently bound  to a cysteine-- in the active site.  Now, notice this is the other substrate,  which is the acetoacetyl-CoA and bound in the active site.  So as we've discussed before, we're  going to make this carbon-carbon bond,  and that's going to happen between this carbon  here and this carbon here.  So this bond needs to be formed.  However, let's take it one step at a time.  The reaction will start by forming  this thioester between the acetoacetyl-CoA carbons  and the cysteine in the active site of the enzyme.  In many reactions that use a cysteine in the active site,  which is used to form a covalent bond to the substrate,  we first need a base to deprotonate the cysteine  and make it a really good nucleophile, which  will subsequently attack the substrate  and form a covalent bond.  Now, in a lot of these cases, the base is a histidine.  Let's take a look if we see a histidine in our structure.  There is a histidine in the structure, H233.  But if you look at this histidine,  it's quite far from our cysteine here.  Well, obviously, because this is a projection,  this is a two-dimensional structure so that we only  see here a projection of a three-dimensional structure,  it's very hard for us to tell if this histidine is,  in fact, close enough to deprotonate this cysteine.  So even though we have this crystal structure,  from this one picture, we do not have enough information  to figure out, well, what is the base that  will deprotonate cysteine before it reacts with acetyl-CoA.  Remember this is often the case with crystal structures that  because of the resolution which we can collect them,  we cannot see the protons.  And if we cannot see the protons,  it's very hard to tell which amino acid residues are  protonated and can serve as a general acid or general bases.  A lot of the researcher's intuition  comes into play to draw these kind of structures.  And it's only with collecting many different kinds  of experimental evidence that we can put together  a more definitive mechanism.  Therefore, we might not know for sure  from this one picture, which is the general base that  deprotonates the cysteine at 111.  So we're not going to assign it for now.  Let's try to write the mechanism for that part.  Here is the acetyl-CoA substrate,  and here is the active site cysteine 111  with its thiol group.  And again, we're not going to assign it,  but there will be a base in the active site of the enzyme that  will need to deprotonate this cysteine before it can react.  Therefore, the reaction first involves  activation of the cysteine, is deprotonated, and then  cysteine can attack the thioester  and form a tetrahedral intermediate.  As we've seen it before, for a lot of these reactions  involving thioesters.  In the first step, we will form four bonds  to this carbonyl carbon, and we have  formed a new bond between the thiol of the cysteine 111  and the starting material, acetyl-CoA.  Of course, there is a negative charge here.  And our base in the active site of the enzyme  will now be protonated.  Now that the tetrahedral intermediate  is going to fall apart by kicking off the CoA moiety.  Of course, this will get protonated presumably  by the same base.  Now it's a general acid that will protonate a CoA.  So we obtain the thioester with the cysteine in the active site  and one molecule of CoA is going to be leaving.  And here is our base.  Notice the tetrahedral intermediate  that we're forming here.  We have an oxygen that develops a negative charge.  And this is very similar to the kinds of intermediate  you've seen in the serine protease mechanism.  Now in that case, such an intermediate  was stabilized with hydrogen bonds  from the backbone of the protein in a structure that  was called an oxyanion hole.  Now let's take a look at the crystal structure of HMG-CoA  to see how a tetrahedral intermediate might  be stabilized.  Here is the acetyl of the acetoacetyl-CoA substrate.  The acetyl now is bound to the cysteine  111 here in the active site.  Now, let's take a look if there are any other residues close  enough to this oxygen. One of them that's shown here  is this NH, which belongs to an amide bond, the backbone amide,  and that's part of the amino acid serine 307.  So this distance here, C3.06 Angstrom,  it's actually close enough for a fairly good hydrogen bond.  Presumably, this interaction will stabilize the binding  of acetyl-CoA in this region of the active site  and may also be involved in catalyzing  the reaction with the cysteine by stabilizing  the tetrahedral intermediate.  In that case, this distance will have  to become even smaller, that is to form a really good hydrogen  bond on the order of 2.6, 2.7 Angstrom.  Since this is only one snapshot of the reaction,  we don't have enough information to tell if this is  a key catalytical interaction.  Once acetyl-CoA has reacted with the enzyme,  hence, formed the thioester with the cysteine 111,  we're now ready to proceed with the reaction  and form a carbon-carbon bond.  Let's take a look.  So in the next step of the reaction,  we want to form a carbon-carbon bond between this methyl  group here and this carbon of the carbonyl  of the other substrate.  So first of all, we need to deprotonate this methyl group.  We're going to form an enolate.  Then the enolate is going to attack this carbonyl.  Once again, we look for a suitable base, and we see,  for example, this glutamate 79 may be, in fact,  serving as a general base to deprotonate the methyl group  here and form the enolate.  Once the enolate is formed, it's going to attack this carbonyl,  and this oxygen is going to start  developing a negative charge, which needs to be compensated  by a general acid.  And it looks like this histidine 233 is close enough  to donate a proton and generate a hydroxyl group here.  All right.  So let's try to write a mechanism based  on what we just said.  Here is the thioester between cysteine 111 and acetyl.  And let's show the general base.  It's going to be glutamate 79.  Because it's a base, I'm going to put a negative charge on it.  There you go.  And this will serve to deprotonate  the methyl from the acetyl, moiety here, and generate  an enolate.  So it's picking up a proton, electron move,  and it's going to generate, as before, a negative charge  on the oxygen, which may be stabilized  by that interaction with the [INAUDIBLE] hydrogen  that we just discussed.  Now, let's try this again.  And here is our enolate.  In the next step, the enolate now  is going to attack the carbonyl of the acetoacetyl-CoA  and form the carbon-carbon bond.  All right.  This is the acetoacetyl-CoA, and we  discussed that next to this oxygen  there is our histidine 233, which we're going  to show it as being protonated.  Therefore, the reaction proceeds as follows.  Here we're forming the carbon-carbon bond.  Then the oxygen is going to pick up  the proton from the protonated histidine  and it's going to form a hydroxyl group.  Therefore, we get cysteine 111 is still  attached to what is known the HMG-CoA product.  So this is our carbon.  This is the new carbon-carbon bond.  We have here a methyl group.  We have the new hydroxyl, which were formed here,  and the rest of the molecule.  And our histidine, it was protonated here,  now it's going to be deprotonated.  So we just saw how the carbon-carbon bond is formed  in the course of this reaction.  And now we're left with a six-carbon thioester  with a cysteine 111 in the active side of the enzyme.  Therefore, the last step of the reaction  would involve hydrolysis of this thioester to free the product  and regenerate the system.  So for the last step, we need to hydrolyze this thioester,  and for that, we're going to need  to activate a water molecule.  Once again, we don't know--  here is the water molecule--  we don't know what's the general base, the residue  in the active site, which removed this proton from water  to allow it to attack the carbonyl of the thioester.  So we're going to call it a general base attached  to the enzyme.  So this base is going to pick a proton from water,  and then the water is going to add to the carbonyl  and once again generate a tetrahedral intermediate.  Say, this the OH from water, and this  is the rest of the molecule.  Once again, this is a tetrahedral intermediate, very  similar to the one we saw in the first step  when we formed this thioester, and presumably, it's  going to be stabilized in a fairly similar manner.  Let's also show that this base attached to the enzyme  is now protonated, and it would probably  donate this proton to reprotonate the cysteine  and reform that thiol group.  So in the second step, thiol takes the electrons,  which picks up the proton from the general base  in the active site.  So at this point, we're just going  to release the thiol of the cysteine 111,  and the rest of the molecule is exactly our product,  which is the HMG-CoA.  The curved arrow mechanism we just wrote  answers part 1 of the problem.  Second question of this problem is  asking about the stabilization of  the tetrahedral intermediate, which actually we  have just discussed.  But let me reiterate as you guys saw  in the serine protease mechanisms,  whenever we're forming this tetrahedral intermediate,  they tend to be stabilized in an oxyanion hole, which  is basically a structure of the enzyme, which can form hydrogen  bonds with the partial negative charge or full negative charge  that develops in a tetrahedral intermediate.  Presumably, similar structure exists  for this HMG-CoA synthase, but because we're only given one  snapshot, one crystal structure, that is not  sufficient information to say for sure which  are the key interactions to stabilize  these tetrahedral intermediates.  A lot more work, a lot more experimental data  is necessary to figure out which are the key hydrogen bonds  and interactions that stabilize the tetrahedral intermediates.  Question 3 is asking us to review the mechanisms by which  enzymes can achieve their amazing rate  acceleration, which is on the order of 10 to the 6  to 10 to 15 times over the uncatalyzed reaction  and of course, to point out these mechanisms in the context  of the HMG-CoA synthase.  As you have seen over and over in this course,  the three general mechanisms by which  enzymes accelerate reactions are binding energy,  general acid/general base catalysis  and covalent catalysis.  Now let's take a look at our structure  and figure out how each one of these mechanisms  might be operating.  To start off, covalent catalysis,  it's pretty obvious here the acetyl-CoA substrate first  reacts and forms a covalent bond with the cysteine  of the HMG-CoA synthase.  So this covalent attachment to the enzyme  allows this residue to be positioned just right  so that it can react with the other substrate.  Now, general acid/general base catalysis,  we've seen all these residues that participate.  Obviously, in order for this to react,  we need a base to deprotonate the cysteine.  Then we need a base, presumably, this glutamate 79,  to deprotonate the methyl group here to form the enolate.  And we need an acid to stabilize and form  this hydroxyl group that will be developing on this oxygen.  So covalent catalysis and general acid/general base  catalysis, that's pretty obvious.  Now when it comes to binding energy,  this is not something that we can obviously  derive from the structure, but we  can postulate the number of ways in which binding energy  contributes to this reaction.  First of all, both of the substrates  need to bind to the enzyme.  In order to do that, they need to be desolvated,  that is to remove all the water molecules that surround them.  So that by itself requires energy.  The binding energy is also derived  by when we align the substrates in the active site  of the enzyme, we align them so closely the right geometry  and within a few tenths of an Angstrom  so that the right orbitals overlap and allow  the reaction to happen.  So also the ability to align this residue  so closely that also contributes to the binding energy.  And finally, the binding energy also  manifests when we're stabilizing, for example,  the transition state of the reaction  relative to the binding of the substrates.  So if, for example, for our tetrahedral intermediate  that will form here, if that transition state  or the tetrahedral intermediate is stabilized more  than the substrate, then the reaction is accelerated  and proceeds towards that pass.  Part 4 of the problem is asking us  to look up the structure of coenzyme A, or CoA  and then contrast the reactivity of say, acetyl-CoA,  the thioester with CoA, with the reactivity of a thioester  with a much smaller thiol group.  Let's see what the coenzyme A looks like.  Here we have the structure coenzyme A.  The business end of the molecule is  this thiol group, which is attached  to a substantially long arm.  And at the end here, we have, as you can recognize,  two phosphates, the ribose and the base adenine.  This is a nucleotide is ADP.  There's also another phosphate here.  But the business end of the molecule is this thiol group,  and we're asked to contrast whether a thioester  form with coenzyme A would behave similarly to a thioester  form with this right-hand portion of the molecule, which  I wrote here.  So it's a much shorter thiol.  Now, it turns out these thioesters will be very, very  similar because really it's only the thiol moiety that we  need to form thioester.  So those thioesters will behave very, very similarly.  Now, the advantage of having such a long arm  for the coenzyme A is that it provides a way  to insert the substrate, which will attach here,  to say, acetyl-CoA, to insert acetyl-CoA in very deep  into the active site of the enzyme.  Having a long arm to guide the thioester may be important.  As you will see later in the course,  fatty acid synthases, which are these mega dalton complexes,  have multiple active sites.  So the fatty acid attaches a thioester  to coenzyme A allows it to be moved  through different active sites and through a same kind  of chemistry in multiple steps over and over again.  The advantage of having a coenzyme A thioester  is that it may provide some additional binding energy.  That nucleotide portion of coenzyme A  may interact specifically with the enzyme  near the active site, whereas, a much smaller thiol  like the one we just saw will not  have that kind of interaction available.  Since we've been talking about thioesters  throughout this entire problem, the last question  is asking us to rationalize why we're  seeing thioesters in metabolism as opposed to oxygen esters.  Now, the key message you need to remember here  is that the resonance that we observe in oxygen esters  is almost completely absent in thioesters.  And this fact makes the thioesters less stable  and therefore, more reactive.  Not only their carbonyl group behaves more  like a ketone group, but their alpha hydrogens  are more acidic.  Let's take a look.  Here is an oxygen ester that shows  a proton in alpha position.  And as you know, the lone pairs on this oxygen  can conjugate with the carbonyl group  and form certain resonance structures, one of which  being this one.  So the electrons can move like this,  and then we're going to have a negative charge here  and a positive charge here.  And this is possible because the electrons on both oxygens  are found in orbitals of comparable energies.  By contrast, in the case of a thioester, we have a sulfur.  Now, the electrons on the sulfur are  in orbitals that are not in comparable energies  with the ones on the ketyl group and therefore,  this kind of conjugation does not, in fact, happen.  And because this doesn't happen, therefore, the electrons  on the carbonyl stay localized, and that  makes the carbonyl a better reactive site.  So it's a better electrophile to react as nucleophiles  behaves more like a ketone.  For the same reason, when we are to deprotonate  the alpha position on a thioester,  the density on the carbonyl is there  to stabilize the enolate much more so than it  would be for an oxygen ester.  Therefore, the pKa, the acidity constant  for this hydrogen on the thioesters  is close to 18, which is smaller, therefore  more acidic than the pKa of the alpha position in oxygen  esters, which is 22.  This sums up Problem 2 of Problem Set 4.  I hope you now have a much better feel of how  we can use crystal structured data  to propose a reasonable mechanism  for enzyme catalyzed reactions.  Keep in mind that writing mechanisms on paper  is relatively easy.  But to truly confirm that that mechanism is taking place  in real life inside the cells, it  takes a lot more experimental work and evidence. 