 The following content is provided under a Creative  Commons license.  Your support will help MIT OpenCourseWare  continue to offer high quality educational resources for free.  To make a donation or view additional materials  from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT OpenCourseWare  at ocw.mit.edu.  JOHN ESSIGMANN: We're still on storyboard 7.  We're on panel C. Panel C is where  I introduced the TCA cycle.  As I mentioned earlier, respiration  consists of three stages.  The first is the pyruvate dehydrogenase reaction,  which we just covered, taking pyruvate to acetyl-CoA.  The second is the TCA cycle, or tricarboxylic acid cycle  taking that acetyl-CoA and basically  oxidizing it in order to generate CO2  but also to produce more reducing equivalents  in the form of mobile electron carriers.  And then the third step of respiration  is taking those reducing equivalents  to the mitochondrial inner membrane, where  the molecules containing those reducing equivalents  are oxidized.  And then, the electrons from that oxidation reaction  are used to power proton pumps that ultimately will generate  the proton gradient that can be used for generation of ATP  or for generation of movement or for other things.  The tricarboxylic acid cycle, which is sometimes  called the Krebs cycle, takes acetyl-CoA  from several different sources.  One of those sources is glycolysis to pyruvate  and pyruvate to acetyl-CoA, as we've just seen.  And the second source of acetyl-CoA  is from fatty acid oxidation.  We'll come to that pathway somewhat later.  Again, looking at panel C, the TCA cycle  starts with the reaction of acetyl coenzyme  A, a 2-carbon compound with oxaloacetate,  a 4-carbon compound, to form the 6-carbon product citrate.  Citrate will lose 2 carbons as carbon dioxide,  and in the process, there'll be a series of oxidation steps  that generate three NADHes one FADH2,  and one either GTP or ATP by substrate-level  phosphorylation.  In terms of the banking system of the cell,  the NADHes that are generated in the mitochondrion  are exchangeable for about three ATPs.  FADH2 is exchangeable for about two ATPs.  So if you look up the total number  of nucleotide triphosphate, or NTP, equivalents  that can be produced in the TCA cycle,  you'll get about 12 ATPs for each 2-carbon unit  of acetyl-CoA that's oxidized.  As a detailed point, I want to mention  that the two carbons that entered the TCA  cycle as acetyl-CoA are not exactly the same two  carbons that come out as CO2 in that cycle.  The carbon dioxides from the input acetyl-CoA  will emerge in later turns of the TCA cycle.  Now we're going to look at panel D. In panel D,  we start looking at the details of the TCA cycle.  JoAnne explained why nature uses thioesters.  The sulfur allows enolization stabilization  of a carbanion at carbon 2, the carbon that's  distal to the coenzyme A functionality.  The carbanion is then able to attack the number 2  carbon, carbonyl, of oxaloacetate  in the reaction catalyzed by citrate synthase.  An intermediate is formed, citroyl coenzyme A,  which loses its coenzyme A moiety by hydrolysis  in a very thermodynamically irreversible step,  resulting in the product citrate.  This step is at the top of the pathway,  and as is usually the case, this highly exothermic step  makes the pathway, overall, irreversible.  Chemically, citrate synthase does  a mixed aldol-Claisen ester condensation.  The product of the citrate synthase reaction, citrate,  is a tertiary alcohol, and tertiary alcohols  are relatively difficult to oxidize.  The next enzyme in the pathway, aconitase,  which is shown in storyboard 8, panel A,  removes a water molecule and then adds a different water  molecule back to rearrange the hydroxyl group,  making a secondary alcohol, which  is much easier to oxidize.  Looking again at panel A, the hydroxyl group of high  isocitrate is oxidized to a ketone,  with the transfer of hydride to NAD+ to make NADH.  This reaction is catalyzed by the enzyme isocitrate  dehydrogenase, ICDH.  The intermediate in this reaction  is oxalosuccinate, which is a beta-keto acid.  As we know from what JoAnne taught us,  beta-keto acids are prone to spontaneous decarboxylation.  So the second half of the isocitrate dehydrogenase  reaction involves the loss of carbon dioxide  in what's usually considered to be an irreversible step.  I do want to point out, however, that  under certain circumstances, you can re-add the carbon  dioxide in order to make the reaction go  in the other direction.  After the ICDH reactions, which generated NADH and resulted  in loss of CO2, the product is alpha-ketoglutarate,  a 5-carbon keto acid.  Take a look at the structure of alpha-ketoglutarate  in the upper right-hand portion of storyboard 8,  panel A. If you hold your finger over the top 2  carbons of alpha-ketoglutarate, you'll  notice that the residue is pyruvate.  So pyruvate plus an acetyl functionality  equals, effectively, alpha-ketoglutarate.  Now take a look back at the mechanism  by which pyruvate is oxidized by pyruvate dehydrogenase.  It's going to be a very similar mechanism for the oxidation  of alpha-ketoglutarate.  The product of the alpha-ketoglutarate  dehydrogenase reaction is succinyl-CoA.  Again, if you look at the structure of this molecule,  succinyl-CoA, it's actually an acetyl-CoA with an acetyl group  put onto one end.  Now let's go back and look at the alpha-ketoglutarate  from a different perspective.  I want to make a point here in that alpha-ketoglutarate  is an alpha-keto acid, and if we were  to replace its keto group with an amino group,  you'd convert this keto acid into  the amino acid glutamic acid.  As with most enzymatic reactions involving such nitrogen  functionalities, a pyridoxal pyridoxamine phosphate cofactor  will be needed to interconvert the alpha-ketoglutarate and  glutamic acid.  So glutamic acid can serve as a source of alpha-ketoglutarate  if the cell is starved for TCA cycle intermediates.  Alternatively, alpha-ketoglutarate  can be a source for glutamic acid  when a cell may need amino acids for protein biosynthesis.  Now, let's turn to panel B, where  we'll start with succinyl coenzyme A. Looking  at the molecule of succinyl-CoA, note  that I've labeled each of the atoms with a symbol.  The triangle and square were from  the original acetyl-CoA molecule that came  in at the top of the pathway.  The enzyme that processes succinyl-CoA is succinyl  coenzyme A synthetase.  As JoAnne taught us, synthetases are enzymes that  typically need a nucleotide.  In this case, the nucleotide involved  is GDP in mammalian systems or ADP in bacterial systems.  In the traditional clockwise direction of the TCA cycle,  they are phosphorylated to form GTP or ATP, respectively.  The molecule that you get after the phosphorylation reaction  in the hydrolysis of the coenzyme A  is succinate, a 4-carbon compound, which  is also a dicarboxylic acid.  This molecule is perfectly symmetrical  and can tumble in three-dimensional space.  The next enzyme in the pathway, succinate dehydrogenase,  cannot distinguish one arm of its substrate, succinate,  from the other.  So if there were a radio label in the acetyl-CoA  at the beginning of the pathway, that radio label  would become scrambled at this point,  uniformly distributed among the two carbons of the two arms.  From this point onward in the TCA cycle,  you will note that the label denoted as the triangle  and box is scrambled, as indicated by triangle divided  by 2 or box divided by 2.  The next enzyme in the pathway is succinate dehydrogenase.  This is the only membrane-bound enzyme in the TCA cycle.  It is a dehydrogenase, and it uses flavin  as a cofactor to help remove electrons  from the succinate substrate.  Flavin picks up electrons from succinate,  converting FAD to FADH2 in the mitochondrial membrane.  The product of the reaction is the alkene fumarate.  The enzyme fumarase adds water to fumarate to form the alcohol  product malate.  The hydroxyl group of the alcohol malate  is primed for oxidation by the next enzyme in the pathway,  malate dehydrogenase, or MDH.  MDH oxidizes malate, which is an alcohol, to a ketone.  The ketone product is oxaloacetate.  The hydride removed from malate is transferred to NAD+ to form  NADH.  As I mentioned, the product of the overall reaction  is oxaloacetate, and its ketone functionality  is now primed for attack by the next molecule of acetyl-CoA  entering the TCA cycle.  As a final point, I've mentioned several times  that oxaloacetate is present at a very low concentration, only  in the micromolar range, inside the mitochondrion  of a mammalian cell.  So it's always at rather limiting concentration.  The cell has to work very hard to preserve enough  of the oxaloacetate to enable the next cycle of the TCA  cycle, that is the acquisition of the next acetyl coenzyme  A group.  One of the ways that the cell can generate oxaloacetate  is by deamination, or transamination of aspartic acid  to the keto acid oxaloacetate.  We typically have plenty of aspartic acid  and this PLP-mediated reaction helps  to maintain a critical level of oxaloacetate.  I want to return to storyboard 7 to make some comments  about the importance of prochirality  in some enzymatic reactions.  This short interlude will help explain  how to track a radio label in a TCA cycle  intermediate as that intermediate progresses  through the TCA cycle.  As you will note, at first glance,  the label does some unexpected things.  But at the end of the day, the fact  that the label does surprising things  helped early biochemists figure out mechanistically how  several enzymes work in concert during the linear steps  of a pathway.  We're going to look at storyboards 7, 8, and 9,  starting with the chemical reaction  at the bottom right of storyboard 7,  panel D. This is the chemical reaction that's  catalyzed by citrate synthase.  You'll notice that I've highlighted  the two carbons with either a triangle or a box.  As we have seen, the nucleophile on acetyl-CoA  attacks the electropositive carbon  of the carbonyl functionality of oxaloacetate.  The carbonyl functionality is a flat sp2 hybridized center.  So if this were a typical organic chemical reaction,  the electrophile could come in from either the top  or the bottom, and you'd get two different stereochemistries  in the product.  That is the citrate at the very bottom  would have equally labeled acetyl arms at the top  and bottom of the molecule as I've drawn it.  You would have a delta divided by 2 for the blue methylene  group, and a box or square divided  by 2 for the red carboxylate group in each  of the two acetyl arms.  Again, these arms are at the bottom and top of the molecule  as drawn in the lower right of panel  D. You'll note, however, that only the top acetyl group  of citrate has the labels.  Initially, the observation that only the top arm acquired label  was a puzzle to early biochemists.  One way to think about the citrate synthase reaction  is to think about the oxaloacetate laying  on the surface of the citrate synthase enzyme.  Now imagine that the enzyme precludes, or blocks, access  to the carbonyl from the bottom and allows access only  to the top, giving rise to only one  stereochemical outcome, the one that I've shown in the citrate  to the right.  Now move ahead to the storyboard number  9, panel B. This panel shows a more cartoon-like  representation of the molecule of citrate.  You can see the acetyl arm on the top, the pro-S arm,  as having the labels.  And the pro-R arm, the one that came from oxaloacetate,  at the bottom, is label free.  So while the pro-R and pro-S arms are chemically identical,  they're going to be handled by the next enzyme  in the series, aconitase, as being chemically  different from one another.  All biochemistry is going to be occurring  on the pro-R arm, that is the arm that  came in from oxaloacetate and not the arm that  came in for acid 2 with acetyl coenzyme A.  In the bottom right of panel B, I've  sketched out an imaginary active site for the aconitase enzyme.  I show a base picking up a proton  from the pro-R arm of the citrate molecule.  And you can see the elimination of the water molecule  from the 3 carbon.  So despite the fact that the citrate molecule is chemically  symmetrical, aconitase, the next enzyme in the reaction series,  is able to distinguish between the pro-R and the pro-S arms.  At this point, I want you to look back at storyboard 8,  panel A. Look once again at the citrate that  is at the upper left-hand corner of storyboard number 8,  and let's imagine that the aconitase chemistry  has happened on the pro-S arm, that is the one in the box.  Keep in mind that these experiments have shown  that this does not happen.  This is just a hypothetical scenario.  In this hypothetical case, the hydroxyl group  would end up on the number 2 carbon,  the one with the blue triangle.  You have to draw it out, but if you  traced this molecule, in which the chemistry happened  on the pro-S arm, all the way around to alpha-ketoglutarate,  you would find out that the alpha-ketoglutarate  dehydrogenase would liberate CO2 from the carboxylate that  has the red box on it.  This is in contrast to the molecule succinate that appears  on storyboard 8, panel B. Succinate is another  symmetrical molecule, but for some reason,  succinate dehydrogenase cannot distinguish between the two  acetyl arms.  Because the enzyme is unable to distinguish the two arms,  in this case, unlike that of aconitase,  the radio label would become scrambled.  The reason that I'm belaboring this point  is because one of the ways that biochemists work out  the chemical reactions involved in a biochemical pathway  is by putting in some kind of labeled molecule.  It could be a radio label or a heavy isotope.  And then they trace the position of the label in the molecule  as you move from molecule to molecule along the pathway.  So label tracer studies are ones that are absolutely  central to all of biochemistry.  And as I mentioned earlier, you'll  get lots of experience in the problem sets  in using labels to work out the details of a pathway.  Before leaving the TCA cycle, there  are a couple of big picture points that I want to make.  You put in two carbons as acetyl-CoA,  deposit them into oxaloacetate to form citrate,  a 6-carbon compound, and then in the cycle,  you lose 2 carbons as carbon dioxide.  That means that there's no loss or gain  of carbon in this cycle.  If you had just one molecule of oxaloacetate,  you'd be able to complete the TCA cycle.  What happens, however, when the cell  is in an, let's say, "energy needed" situation, where  it needs to buff up this cycle, that  is increase the number of molecules cycling  to be able to accommodate the processing of more and more  molecules of acetyl-CoA?  Those molecules of acetyl-CoA might flood in  from carbohydrate metabolism or, as we'll see later,  from catabolism of lipids.  Let's look at panel A of storyboard 11.  As shown in this figure, one way to accomplish  increasing the carbon content of the TCA cycle  is to take an amino acid, such as glutamate,  and remove its amino group to form alpha-ketoglutarate.  Note that if you increase the concentration of any one  molecule in the TCA cycle, for example, alpha-ketoglutarate,  you're effectively increasing the concentrations  of all molecules in the cycle.  Because it's a cycle, many of the molecules  are in equilibrium with one another.  Going clockwise around the TCA cycle from alpha-ketoglutarate,  we come to succinyl-CoA.  Succinyl-CoA is an entry point into the TCA cycle  from odd-chain fatty acids in certain amino acids,  such as methionine.  So these molecules can give rise to succinyl-CoA  that itself will then increase the concentration  of all molecules in the TCA cycle.  Our third primary input point is at oxaloacetate.  It involves aspartic acid being deaminated into oxaloacetate.  This is a very common way to increase  the amount of oxaloacetate available for the TCA cycle.  This reaction can dramatically increase the rate of processing  of molecules by the TCA cycle.  Finally, there's an enzyme we'll look at later  called pyruvate carboxylase, or PC,  which can take pyruvate in the mitochondrion, add CO2 to it,  and form oxaloacetate.  We're going to come to this enzyme  later when we talk about carboxylase enzymes as a class.  This is an important enzyme in the pathway of gluconeogenesis.  So overall, I think you can see that there are several ways  that a cell can increase the overall concentration  of the intermediates of the TCA cycle.  Increasing any one intermediate increases all of them.  And that will increase the rate by which  acetyl-CoA molecules can be processed ultimately  to generate energy.  The general word describing this buffing up of the TCA cycle  is anapleurosis, which comes from the Greek word "filling  up." 