 GUEST SPEAKER: Governor, thank you  so much for asking me to outline a comprehensive cost-benefit  analysis, regaring decision making  over a long delayed clean up of a highly polluted Superfund  site.  As we know, underground storage tanks at the site  have leaked into nearby wetlands and cleanup is expected  to cost $35 million or more.  The debate centers around the city's eagerness  to reuse this site for a new mall.  And who should be held accountable  for the costs associated with this clean up, as the state  government has no funds, and the company  responsible for the damage has since gone out of business,  leaving even no clients remaining.  Including an alterior road that would link to the Superfund  site to a nearby highway would provide  additional accessibility, and consequently  more business for the mall, perhaps justifying  more government spending.  As you know, Governor, multiple parties  are pressuring you in this decision,  and there is no consensus as to who  should bear the cost of ensuring the site is safe  and of redeveloping the site.  You asked me to outline a comprehensive cost-benefit  analysis that can be done to help answer this question.  I would argue that a cost-benefit analysis should  not in fact be used in this decision-making process,  as I believe the method is deeply flawed,  and may lead to misleading results,  exacerbating feelings of poorly distributed benefits  among parties.  While proponents of cost-benefit analysis  assert that it, 1, results in the more efficient allocation  of resources and, 2, provides objectivity and transparency,  in a paper titled Pricing the Priceless by Frank  Ackerman and Lisa Heinzerling, the authors  argue against these arguments by illuminating  four fundamental flaws to cost-benefit analysis.  I will outline some of these fundamental flaws in relation  to the case the Superfund site and provide thoughts  for an alternative approach.  The first fundamental flaw centers around it  cost-benefit analysis, the process  of reducing life, health, and the natural world  to monetary values.  For example, according to cost-benefit analysis,  preventing the extinction of bald eagles  is worth $250 per household.  And saving a human life is calculated  to be worth $6.3 million.  For the people in this scenario that we're talking about today,  a risk of toxic poisoning due to the previous industrial factory  operations at the site, the price of their health,  and even their lives, cannot be assigned a finite amount  of money.  Furthermore, the $6.3 million figure  is not considered by the cost-benefit analysis  to be a price of life, but the cost of the risk of death.  According to Ackerman, in this way  the cost-benefit analysis equates the risks  of death with death itself, which are actually  two different calculations.  The second, cost-benefit analysis ignores the reality  that citizens are concerned about risks  to others and in addition to their concern about risk  to themselves.  If we do a cost-benefit analysis looking  at the rebuilding of the Superfund site,  our analysis can't quantify the value  to our townspeople people of the lives  and health of their relatives, and friends, and even  strangers in the town.  Thirdly, cost-benefit analysis fails  to address the collective choice presented  to society, as its valuation of environmental benefits  is based only individual's private decision as consumers,  and not collective decisions as citizens.  For example, a study by Mark Sagoff  found that his students in their role as citizens  opposed commercial ski development of a wilderness  area, but in their role as consumers would plan  to ski there if it were actually built. So in this scenario,  cost-benefit analysis could take into account only  our towns peoples' willingness to pay  for a new mall as individuals and consumers,  and not how they value this site and its environmental  and community value as citizens.  In addition, there are fundamental flaws  and the use of discounting.  While discounting acknowledges that individuals believe  it is better for them to suffer harm later rather than sooner,  it doesn't address the very, very long term,  where discounting its a choice between preventing harm  to the current generation and preventing similar harms  to future generations.  And discounting also assumes that environmental problems  won't get any worse if we wait to address them,  and that technology will keep evolving  so that future solutions will do more and cost less.  Therefore, if we do a cost-benefit analysis  for the remediation of this Superfund site,  we cannot take into account the possibility that we find  an additional or irreversible toxic pollution source that we  do not currently know exists.  Based on these fundamental flaws in cost-benefit analysis  outlined by Ackerman and Heizerling,  we cannot expect such an analysis to be either objective  or transparent.  In fact, the cost-benefit analysis  relies on a series of assumptions and value  judgements that are far from objective.  As a result, I don't think we should  use a cost-benefit analysis for our analysis.  But rather, I think we should look  to past situations of Superfund site remediation  that may add in our understanding of how  other towns have addressed such complex situations  and undertake economic analyzes of various past planning  decisions that could inform our own situation.  Another idea would be to potentially--  based on public town hall hearings--  move toward the consideration of a local vote  to decide whether a tax can be applied to the town's citizens  and collected into a pool that will  go towards cleaning the site and rebuilding the mall.  I look forward to continuing to analyze alternative approaches  to evaluate our best options going forward  in this complex situation. 