 Good morning, Board of Directors.  As all of you know, from 2000 to 2007,  the US lost four million acres in cultural land  to development.  It is really the size of Massachusetts.  And although there are federal policies targeted  to combat this loss of farmland, they  are not nearly enough to deal with this problem  we have here at home.  And so I'll speak about three things.  Firstly, what I intend to find out  on my upcoming trips to EU, Japan, and Australia,  who I intend to find out this information from.  Secondly, what opportunities I see in these trips  for cross-contextual learning.  And thirdly, what challenges I anticipate  translating this learning to ideas and strategies  that are really useful for us here in the US.  So firstly, in these regions we intend  to focus on three critical issues drawn from the problems  here at home.  We termed the three Ps--  place, policies, and people.  So firstly, this very strong geographical notion of place  and a battle for it.  The US is losing its finest land to development,  and we want to fight out in these regions  how they view the trade-off between development  and farmland protection, or if it even exists  for them in the first place.  Secondly, we want to find out what policies these regions  have to combat the development of farmland into other uses  and that impact on performance, and thirdly, the people.  We want to find out the cultural institutions  the cultural mindsets to our buttressing cases and policies,  essentially what the stakeholders of these farming  communities are responding to the policies that  are being developed.  So who do we intend to find out this affirmation from?  We intend to look for stakeholders' business  industry that are driving the interaction between farmland  and development.  And they will inform us most about the issues of place.  We also intend to talk to the chairpersons and culture  committees in EU member states, as well as officials in pockets  of every culture in Japan, Australia,  to find out about their experiences, that challenges,  and their successes when dealing with farmland protection  policies.  We also plan to look at the people  to whom these effects of policies  are filtering down to the members of the farming  community.  Who through their individually unique stories,  as opposed to just policy memos and big data  will inform us most about issues of people.  We need these three pieces together  to find out what was intended, what is happening,  and what it really should be.  So the next idea I'll would like to talk about  would be the why I want to visit these three countries,  what opportunities there are.  Is it really necessary and valuable endeavor?  And I would say yes because these three regions are  similar enough to the US to raise  the possibility of opportunities for learning,  and yet different enough to guarantee these opportunities  for learning.  So the US the EU, Japan, Australia,  they are like the US next industrialized nations.  If you look beyond the broad similarities of wealth, power,  development levels, inference, a whole host differences appear.  They are located in different parts of the world--  the Western Hemisphere, Asia, and the Southern Hemisphere--  there are different geographies, histories, neighborhoods,  contexts, and ideologies.  And these differences drive cross-contextual learning  for two reasons.  Firstly, they greatly reduce the learning curve  for looking at the effects of different policies  by providing a test bed with exposed results as well.  So instead of sitting up with all of us debating the merits  and demerits of increased intervention in farming  policies, we need only look at Japan--  highest-producing support levels among OECD countries,  overly protective subsidies that have  driven average annual household income  levels 25% to 30% higher than the national average  in Australia, the second lowest producer support  levels of OECD countries and where  a strong adherence to market-oriented policies  has actually created a different result from Japan.  And secondly, these countries also  provide us with different ideas that we might not  have considered before.  For example, the European Union's common agriculture  policy contracts with farmers for the provision  of ecological services, which is alternative to the traditional  notion here in US where farmland policy is essentially  meant to protect land for productive purposes.  So essentially, exposure to these new ideas  would provide us a bigger toolkit  to develop more robust strategies  for farmland protection here in the US.  But with these great opportunities  also come great challenges in two forms, essentially--  differences in institutions and differences in cultural.  So differences in institutions like political systems, laws--  they essentially make policies not all but irrelevant  to the United States in a certain vein.  In European Union, they have a greater acceptance  of regional-international treaties and conventions.  And this has implications for trying  to transplant policies across the Atlantic and culture.  We cannot underestimate the influx of culture, history,  and policies.  For example, after all, in Japan,  the reason for the high levels of producer support can be  traced back to the memories shortage that occurred after  World War II, something that cannot be said of the US.  So what may be popular in my country  may be wildly unpopular in another.  So what we intend to do on our trip  is not to be transplanters of these policies back to the US.  We intend to be translators where we take the spirit  and not let letter of these policies  and combine it with the our understanding of the realities  here in the US to develop a selection of ideas  that circumvent differences in institutions and account  for differences in culture.  That said, even in the US, the institutions  do change and cultures do evolve [INAUDIBLE] at a much  lower rate.  And even within a country, cultures do vary very widely.  So even ideas that seem improbable for now  should not be discarded, but kept for future reference  so whenever the time comes, we are ready to implement them.  So in conclusion, my trips will have great [INAUDIBLE]  opportunities, but also affront with challenges,  but an appreciation that points that differences in countries  are the drivers of learning, and not similarities, and also  an appreciation that policy-learning observations  are just a start to create a translation effort  should allow us to reap the full benefits of our trips.  Thank you for attending. 