 You're on.  ELIZABETH COOPER: OK, good morning and welcome.  Thank you for agreeing to meet with me to serve  on this advisory group to develop a regional water  strategy for our metropolitan area.  I've called this meeting to give you my advice for how  to proceed in this process.  During this meeting, I will first clarify our goals  in this process.  Then I did devise some challenges that I see  and what we stand to lose if we don't  conduct this process wisely.  Next, I'll give my thoughts on the strategy  to follow to make a sound and politically viable  regional plan.  And I'll talk about what I think success in this process  would look like for you to keep in mind prospectively as you  carry out the planning process.  So our goal is to develop a strategy  for administering water that balances,  and to whatever extent possible, actually  meets the needs of the diverse stakeholders  from the industrial, residential, agricultural, and  conservation sectors, as well as our partners in government.  I also believe that a second, but still important  goal is to get through this process in a way  that this diverse group of stakeholders  feels good about the causes they took part in, has learned  from it, and thus is encouraged too  and has a skill set to collaborate again  in the future.  As you know, we face some challenges  to developing this plan.  With current distribution and used water supplies  are tight and are insufficient to meet  the needs of development that we hope will return to our region  with economic rebound.  If we don't develop a strategy to as far as possible  meet the needs of all the stakeholder groups involved,  we will see rising conflict that could really  strain the relationships in this community  and ultimately tear it apart.  I'm also concerned that if we don't act wisely and proceed  in a way that everyone is on board with,  our process could be undermined by parties  who feel disenfranchised or who don't want  to collaborate on a solution.  So how do we navigate this delicate task with our eyes  open to arrive at a sound solution?  I'm very confident in your abilities and those  of the experts that you talk to make sound difference  about a plan to share and distribute the water,  but I don't want to just rely on expertise to engineer the best  solution to this problem.  I want a plan that is developed to be the result of an informed  consensus that has the backing of everybody  needed to implement it.  Political viability is one key factor we need,  and an expert solution won't necessarily get us there.  You have been selected to be part  of this advisory group because of your expertise  and credibility to deal with this policy  and decision-making effort.  You have the authority to convene a credible process.  However, I think we will end up with a stronger and more  politically viable solution if we directly  involve stakeholders who we see as  likely to be in conflict over the decision-making effort.  I suggest you bring in a professional neutral  facilitator who can aid in involving stakeholders  in the proposal generating process  and who could help solidify participants  confidence and the neutrality of the process  since disagreements are likely to be politically charged.  Here's how I suggest you proceed.  Hire an experienced neutral as I said.  Begin by conducting situation assessment.  This means meeting with representatives of each  of the stakeholder groups.  I previously mentioned and anyone  else who thinks they should be included in the process  and discuss with them what their needs are for water, what  their interests are, and how they'd like  to see a regional plan develop.  After you've conducted that assessment,  distill down the results of your research  and communicate to the public the parameters of the problem  and what are some of the preliminary avenues that could  be pursued to reach a plan.  Ask stakeholders groups to select representatives  to participate in a formal consensus building process.  Conduct joint fact finding about uses of  and needs for water in the region and help participants  explore strategies that conceptualize water  as a flexible resource where it can meet multiple groups  needs simultaneously.  Here you can bring in your own expertise.  And by all means, we want everyone  to agree together on the facts that we're  going to use to make the recommendations together.  Invent options based on the results of the information  gathering.  Help participants in the process.  Find ways to add value to the resources you're dealing with  and invent mutually acceptable solutions.  If necessary, bring other issues besides water to the table.  These groups intersect and overlap  in a number of areas that affect our planning strategy.  And it might be that if we add in other ingredients,  we're able to package solutions that are  more acceptable to everyone.  Excuse me.  Help representatives caucus the various options  with their constituencies and clarify their interests  and needs and help them package options together in a way  that everyone can agree to and have them all endorse  an agreement for a strategy.  And then they will turn that recommendation over to you  to formalize and then that's what we would implement.  After we engage in this process, how will we  know that we've succeeded?  All groups can sign on to the agreement,  and all agree that it is a better arrangement than having  no agreement at all.  And participating groups will have  learned about each other's needs and each other in a way  that they can see that coming to consensus  is not necessarily a zero-sum game.  I think that this is the best strategy not only  because collaboration improves the quality of the decision,  but it also makes it more implementable.  It should help neutralize the process politically  if it has extremely widespread support.  Both the media and the state government,  who have been less than favorable about developing  a regional water plan would have a hard time criticizing it  if everyone really backs it up.  This has been a brief overview, and I'm  happy to address questions and discuss in more detail.  Thank you.  LAWRENCE SUSSKIND: Thank you. 