 MARKUS KLUTE: Welcome back to A20 special relativity.  In this section, I am going to talk about the deuteron, which  is one of the two stable isotopes of hydrogen.  The atom is called deuterium.  The nucleus actually contains one proton and one neutron.  So it's quite simple.  And so we can use this as an example to understand  the concept of binding energy and how  we can create objects of heavier mass or nuclei of heavier mass.  We can do this by bringing protons and neutrons together.  And when we do that, they have a likelihood of binding  together to deuterium.  And they release an energy in form of a photon of 2.3 mev  So the way to understand is that the combination,  the bound combination of the protons and neutrons  have more favorable energy state, which  is visible in this nuclear potential here.  So the deuteron lives as a combination of the proton  and the neutron here.  In order to now split up the deuteron, which is stable,  we have to add energy.  We have to add at least 2.3 mev of energy  in order to release the proton and the neutron  and make them free.  The natural abundance of deuterium in the Earth  is rather limited with 0.0115% in the Earth.  But, nevertheless, deuterium is extremely useful and extremely  important in the evolution of the universe,  in the synthesis of more heavier elements,  as it's kind of a part of the chain, which  allows the creation of helium.  And then helium can be used in order  to create even heavier nuclei.  To give you a sense in the numbers,  the mass of the neutron is 2.01355 in atomic units.  The mass of the proton is about one.  The mass of the neutron is a little bit bigger, but also  about one.  So in order to now get the binding energy--  so the energy, which is kind of stored in the deuteron, when  it's binding together, the proton and the neutron  can be accessed by adding the proton, and the neutron mass,  and subtracting the mass of a deuteron.  Again, that's a minimal energy needed in order to free up  the proton and the neutron.  If you add more energy, then you actually  also give kinetic energy to the proton and the neutron  in this reaction.  The deuteron was discovered in 1934.  And it's fundamental also in production  of hydrogen bonds, which were produced about 20 years later.  So the deuteron itself is a rather important nuclei.  Again, as I said before, it's fundamental.  It's stability is fundamentally important in nuclear synthesis  after the Big Bang. 