 PROFESSOR: Welcome back to A20 special relativity.  In this last section of this chapter,  we talked about applications and implications  of special relativity.  We talked about the global positioning system.  You all have used GPS before, be it in your car  when you're trying to find your way through town  or when you go for a run and you want to measure how long  and how fast you actually are running.  The global positioning system is a set  of satellites all equipped with atomic clocks.  And they're used for navigation and have been developed first  under the name of Napster GPS.  And GPS is one of many global or few global navigation system.  Others are GLONASS, BDS, Galileo Systems developed in Europe,  in Russia, in Japan, and so.  This picture here shows you how you  want to view this view of Earth and then at around 20,000  kilometer, GPS has about 31 satellites,  which zooms around the Earth.  And as soon as you have three satellites, which  you can see from your viewpoint, you  can actually figure out where that viewpoint is.  Think about each satellite gives you an information of a sphere.  The cross section between two spheres is a line.  And if you have three spheres crossing,  that gives you three-dimensional information about location  on which you're looking at this.  GPS was-- the first satellites were launched in 1978.  Again, 31 satellites in orbit at the time right now.  So how does this work?  So the satellite transmits information  about position in time in regular intervals.  It's does have a clock.  They use a specific frequency or multiple frequency  to send signals.  And then the receiver calculates how far away the satellite is  and how long it took the message to arrive  at the place of the receiver.  Again, three satellites are used to extract the exact location.  However, as you can imagine, the reason  why I bring this up in this class  is that we have to consider effects  of special relativity and also, general relativity,  as we will discuss later in this class.  So you have clocks on the satellites.  And you have identical clocks on Earth.  And they do tick differently as we discussed many times  in this class.  If you were to calculate the effect of special relativity,  the prediction is that the clocks  take about 7 microseconds a day slower on the satellite  then compared to the one on Earth.  However, the satellite at a higher orbit.  And the gravitational pull at a higher orbit  is less strong as on Earth.  And that then, as a result, is the clocks  on the satellites actually run faster than the ones on Earth.  And that effect is larger, very larger  than the effect of special relativity, which  is effect from then just moving relative to the observer.  The fact is 47 microseconds a day.  And then you can just calculate the net correction,  which is 38 microseconds a day, which corresponds  to about 11 kilometers.  Now imagine on your run and there's  11 kilometer difference a day.  I don't expect you to run for a day,  but you might run for an hour.  Still the effect is rather large.  So you want to have a more precise system.  And therefore, those effects need to be corrected,  and they are.  They're typically built in into the electronics  and automatically corrected.  The precision achieved with GPS system  ranges a little bit based on how you use the information, what  kind of transceiver you use.  It's in the order of 505 meters to 30 centimeters,  so about this of a distance.  So anywhere on this planet you can pinpoint your location  by about this with this precision.  Well, this concludes the discussion  of implications and applications in special relativity. 