 This week, we will examine some more advanced topics  in the application of Newton's laws of motion.  First, we will look at more examples of constrained motion,  where the motion is forced to obey  some particular condition in addition  to Newton's laws of motion.  These conditions usually specify some particular relationship  between coordinates of objects and the system we are studying.  Specifically, we will re-examine the case  of objects suspended with pulleys and ropes,  but with more complex systems than we  have discussed previously.  The fact that the ropes have fixed length  will provide a constraint condition  relating the coordinates of our various masses.  Second, we will examine the case of forces  acting on a continuous, extended mass distribution as opposed  to acting on discrete point masses.  This will allow us to introduce a powerful differential  analysis technique from calculus where we model continuous mass  distributions as made up of lots of small, discrete mass  elements and then examine the limiting case  of infinitesimally small elements  to obtain the continuous behavior.  This is a technique that you will  see applied over and over again in physics and engineering.  And in fact, we will return to it again later in this course.  Our specific example will be to study how tension  varies in a long, massive rope.  This is in contrast to the light,  effectively massless ropes that we discussed previously.  Finally, we will discuss velocity-dependent forces--  that is, forces whose strength depends on the velocity  or some function of the velocity of the mass being acted on.  The most common example of this is resistive forces or drag  forces, which are caused by motion of a solid object  through a fluid, like air or water.  That is the example we will discuss this week.  Another example you may be aware of  is the magnetic force that acts on a charged particle, which  depends upon the velocity of the charged particle.  In all three of these cases, we will simply  be applying Newton's three laws of motion,  but the situations will require a more sophisticated treatment  to what has come before. 