 We already defined work in one dimension  is the product of force times displacement  for a constant force, but now let's look at a case  where we're applying a force, f, that is a function of x.  So, our component, f of x, is a function  of x in the i hat direction.  And one of the simplest examples of a force like this  is what we call the spring force.  Now, when we apply this force to our object--  and let's look at an object, i, i hat direction,  we'll have an origin.  And this is our plus-x coordinate system.  When we apply force-- what we want to look at  is because the force is a function of position-- then  we want to look at the displacement  over a small amount.  So let's call this the point xj.  And out here, let's refer to this as xj plus 1.  And what we've done is we're going  to ask how much work is done when the force is displaced  from here to there.  And that's what we'll call delta x.  So now our displacement is a small displacement x of j  plus 1 minus x of j.  And our work for this small displacement-- and that's  why we'll indicate it with a delta-- is  equal to the force, which is a function of x,  times this displacement.  And so we get f of x times x of j plus 1 minus x of j.  And what we have to indicate here  is because the force is varying, we're  looking at just this displacement here.  Let's refer to this force as in the j-th part.  The total work is just the sum of all these scalar quantities.  Remember, although force is a vector and displacement  is a vector, the product of these two quantities  is a scalar.  And so, if we want the total work,  we have to sum from j goes from 1 to n of this quantity  f of j dot-- and I'll put a little j there  to indicate that-- delta xj.  What does this sum mean?  Well imagine that we're making a series of displacements  all the way out to a final position,  x final, and we divided this interval into n pieces.  And so this represents the little bit  of work done for all of these displacements.  And that is what we define to be the work  for a non-constant force.  The issue here is about how fine we cut this interval in.  We made n individual pieces.  But if we want to ask ourselves, what  is the limit as n goes to infinity,  then that's what we now need to consider.  So what we're doing is we're making  smaller and smaller and smaller little displacements.  And we're taking this sum-- j goes from 1 to n  of x of xj times delta xj.  And this limit of a sum is by definition  the integral of the force with respect to dx.  So what we end up with is our work is the integral of f of x.  It's a function and I'm going to have an integration variable, x  prime of dx prime, where x prime is  going from our initial position to our final position.  And this is now our definition of work  which generalizes a constant force to a non-constant force.  Again, let's try to look at some type  of geometric interpretation.  So if we plotted f of x versus x.  And now let's consider a case where  we have some arbitrary force.  So I'm going to just draw the force as if it were arbitrarily  increasing as a function of x.  And here is our x initial.  And here's our x final.  And again, we would like to make a geometric interpretation.  Let's consider xj.  And I'll make this very big.  xj plus 1 for the sake of visualization.  And this value here is f of xj.  And so what we see now is that little bit of work,  like we had for a constant force,  can be approximated as the area underneath the curve for just  this small interval between xj and xj plus 1.  And if we make this sum, what we're doing  is we're just taking a series of approximations  to the area under these curves.  Now you can see, graphically, that there  is very little error when the function was nearly constant.  But in this position, where the function is growing,  this represents our little error.  However, in the limit, as n goes to infinity,  we can make that error go vanishingly small.  So once again, we see, as a geometric interpretation,  that this is the area under the curve of the force  versus position between the points  initial xi and initial-- and the final, x  final, where the particle is being  displaced from an initial position  to some final position.  And here we can call our initial position anywhere we want.  If I write that, this x initial, to the final position.  And that's our generalization of the definition of work. 