 We're now going to introduce the concept of potential energy.  Let's begin by considering a system where  a conservative force is acting.  So I'll consider a conservative force, which I'll call F sub c.  So force set to force, the work integral is path independent.  So the work integral for this force is the integral of F sub  c .ds, which is the path going from point A to point B.  And for a conservative force, this integral does not depend  upon the path from A to B. It's independent of A and B.  So it depends only upon the endpoints.  So this is a path independent integral.  And since it depends only upon the endpoints,  I can write it, since it's going to be an integral from point A  to point B-- this integral must be  equal to some function of the final point.  So some function of r sub B minus some function  of the initial point r sub A. And to just get this integral  from A to B, in our usual way of evaluating a definite integral,  it's going to be equal to some function of r  B minus some function of r A, since the integral depends only  upon the endpoints.  Now, let's call this function-- I'm  going to make a sort of funny choice here-- so let's  call this function minus U as a function of position factor r.  And we'll see the reason for this funny choice of minus sign  in just a moment.  So now with this definition, my work integral, which again,  is the integral of F sub c .ds from point A to point B is now  minus U of r B minus minus U of r A. So in other words,  that's minus U of r B-- so minus minus gives me a plus U of r  sub A.  For shorthand, I can write that as minus U sub B plus U sub A.  And since we start out at point A and go to point B,  notice that I can also write this  as the negative of the change in U. Since the final value of U  is r U at B and the initial value is U at A,  so this minus U B plus U A is equal to minus delta  U, the change in U as we go from the initial  to the final position.  And note that in addition to that, given that this  is the work integral, I can summarize that  by writing that-- so I'll say, note  that delta U is equal to the negative of the work done  going from point A to point B. Now,  let's write the work kinetic energy theorem using this newly  introduced U function.  So the work kinetic energy theorem,  which tells us that the work done, which we've seen  is minus U sub B plus U sub A is equal to the change  in kinetic energy delta k, which I can write as K sub B minus K  sub A. Or I could also write that as 1/2 M V B squared  minus 1/2 M V A squared.  So this is just me stating that the work done on the system  is equal to the change in kinetic energy.  And I can write the work in terms of my function U  that I've introduced here to minus U sub B plus U sub A.  So I'm going to rearrange this equation now--  basically the one involving U's and the one involving  kinetic energies-- so that I have all the terms involving  point A on one side and all the terms involving  point B on the other side.  So rearranging, I get that at point A 1/2 M V  A squared plus U sub A is equal to at point B 1/2 M V B squared  plus U sub B. Now, notice however,  that there is nothing special about how  I chose the points A and B. They're completely arbitrary.  So that means that this equation must  be true for any points A and B.  And what that means is that each side  must be equal to the same constant  for any point in the system.  So in fact, we can write that K plus U for any point  must be able to some constant, which  I'm going to call E sub mech.  So K here is the kinetic energy.  U is my function that I introduced,  and we're going to call it the potential energy.  And E sub mech-- and remember, this E sub mech  here is a constant.  E sub mech is something that we call  the total mechanical energy.  Now, what we've done here is that we've  shown that the total mechanical energy, which  is the sum of the kinetic energy and the potential energy,  is a constant under the action of a conservative force.  In other words, if we look at this equation  and look at how it changes with time,  the change in the kinetic energy, plus the change  in the potential energy is equal to the change  in the total mechanical energy.  And this is 0 for our conservative force.  So in other words, the change in kinetic energy  is balanced by the change in potential energy, such  that the sum is 0 when the force acting is conservative.  Now, we've now introduced the very important concept  of the potential energy that is associated  with the conservative force.  And we see that the change in the potential energy,  the way we defined it, the change in potential energy  is equal to the negative of the work integral  for our conservative force going from point A  to point B. Now in fact, it's actually  only the change in the potential energy  that has physical significance.  We'll be concerned with potential energy differences  or changes.  The actual value of the potential energy  itself doesn't matter.  We're free to choose any convenient reference  point, or 0 point, for measuring the potential energy.  It's equivalent to choosing a coordinate origin when  we're talking about positions.  Now, the potential energy change is  related to the work done by conservative forces.  But we know that in general, work  can also be done by non-conservative forces.  Although, that work by non-conservative forces  will depend upon the path taken from point A to point B.  So in general, the total work is given  by the sum of the conservative work--  the work done by conservative forces, which  we can relate to a potential energy change,  and the non-conservative work done.  And it's this total work that tells us  what the change in the kinetic energy is.  Now we'll soon see that in the presence  of non-conservative forces, the total mechanical energy, which  is K plus U, is not a constant. 