 Let's now consider the generalization of the result  that the torque on a single particle about a point  causes the angular momentum of that particle about that point  to change to a collection of particles.  So let's begin by indicating some ith particle with momentum  Pi and some jth particle over here with momentum Pj.  And this is a big system of n particles.  And we'd like to calculate the angular  momentum about some point, s.  So that angular momentum will consist of the direct product  of the vector from s to the ith particle  and the direct product of the vector r s to the jth particle.  So the angular momentum, total, will  be the sum over all the particles, 1 to n,  of this sum, rsj cross Pj.  Now, what we'd like to do is, again, as before,  take the time derivative of this angular momentum.  We have the sum--  j goes from 1 to n.  We have two derivatives here, by the product rule,  cross Pj, plus the sum, j goes from 1 to n of rsj,  cross Fj, where we use the fact, as we did before,  that the force on the jth particle  is equal to the change in momentum of the jth particle.  Now, this first piece, again, the derivative  of the vector from s to the jth part is the velocity.  So we have j equals 1 to n of v--  the velocity of the jth particle--  cross Mj, Pj.  And that's 0, as we know that a vector cross product  with itself is 0.  And this piece in here--  now, we have to be a little bit careful--  but rsj cross Fj is the torque on the jth particle.  So that is the torque on the jth particle.  Now, remember that we showed that internal-- the forces  on the jth particle could be both due  to internal or external forces.  And as long as the internal forces  pointed between two particles--  pointed along the line connecting those particles,  the internal torques cancel in pairs.  And this will only be the external torque.  So we've assumed that the internal torques  cancel in pair.  And that has to do with an assumption about the direction  of the internal forces.  And so we can conclude that this is just  the total external torque about the point s, s total.  And we'll drop that total, and we'll  conclude that the torque for our system of particles  is just-- causes the angular momentum of the system  of particles to change.  The calculation is exactly like the single particle,  with a few subtleties that have to do with internal torques  canceling in pairs. 