 Last week, we discussed the kinematics of motion.  How one describes the motion of an object  by specifying its position, velocity, and acceleration  as a function of time.  This week, we will continue by discussing  the dynamics of motion.  How the application of forces on an object  changes the geometry or trajectory of its motion.  We will see that the applied forces and the change  in trajectory are related through Newton's laws  of motion.  We will begin by reviewing Newton's three laws of motion.  These were a landmark achievement  in scientific thought.  Most people who haven't studied physics  tend to intuitively think in terms of the ancient mechanics  of Aristotle in which an applied force is required to maintain  a body in uniform motion.  Superficially, this seems to agree  with our everyday experience, but only  because friction plays such an important role  in our everyday life.  One of Newton's great insights was  that applied forces cause changes in an object's motion,  rather than being necessary to maintain uniform motion.  Newton's laws were the end result  of a great deal of careful definition,  observation, and reasoning by many scientists  up to and including Newton.  It is a fascinating and compelling chapter  in the history of science, but we will not discuss  that history in this course.  Instead, we will simply state Newton's three laws of motion  as assumed postulates or axioms and discuss their meaning  and application.  Finally, we will consider several specific examples  of physical forces, such as gravity, contact forces exerted  by a solid surface, like the so-called normal force, which  acts perpendicular or normal to the surface,  and friction, which acts parallel to the surface,  pulling forces like tension in a rope or chain,  and the force exerted by a stretched or compressed spring  described by Hooke's law.  Taken as a whole, this week will show us  how to connect the two sides of Newton's Second Law of Motion,  f equals ma, the dynamics or application  of forces on the left-hand side and its relation  to the kinematics, the change in geometry of the object's motion  or trajectory, on the right-hand side. 