 Now that we've seen how coordinates are related  between two inertial frames, I want  to consider a slightly more advanced example  for a moment, which is supposed that capital V, the vector  velocity of frame S prime relative to inertial frame S,  is not a constant.  So in this case, suppose that frame S prime has  an acceleration, capital A, relative to S.  We now say that as prime is a non-inertial frame, because it  is accelerated relative to frame S. Now  we saw that in inertial frames, one always  measures the same acceleration for the same object,  even though you'll measure different velocities  in different positions in general.  That's not going to true in a non-inertial frame.  In a non-inertial frame, the acceleration, A prime,  is equal to the acceleration of frame S minus capital  A, the acceleration of frame S prime relative to S. Remember,  capital A is 0 for S prime being an inertial frame,  when capital V is a constant.  But if capital V is not a constant,  then capital A is not 0.  So you will measure different accelerations  in these different frames.  Now what that tells us is that Newton's laws are going  to look a little different.  And let's see how that works.  So now, the force measured in frame S prime-- I'll  call that F prime-- we expect that from Newton's second law  to be the mass times the acceleration A prime.  But that is the mass times the acceleration measured  in frame S minus m capital A, the acceleration of frame S  prime relative to frame S.  Now I can rewrite this as two terms.  One I'll call F physical, which represents the physical forces  acting on the object.  And the second term, I'm going to call  F fictitious for reasons that we'll see in a moment.  So what this means is the following  is that an observer in frame S prime in order  to explain the motion of the object using Newton's laws  will have to invoke not just the physical forces interacting  on the object, which might be due to gravity  or rope pulling or an engine pushing  or a hand acting on something, but will also  have to both an apparent force, which I'll call F fictitious,  that acts on everything.  And in this case, F fictitious is equal to minus m capital A.  But that force will not be associated, will not  be identifiable with any actual, real physical interaction.  It's an artifact of the choice of coordinate system.  It's an artifact of the non-inertial coordinate system  that frame S prime is in.  For that reason, we call it a fictitious force.  And it's to be distinguished from real, physical forces  of the type that we've been talking about up until now.  So you may have seen earlier that  for the motion of an object in a circle around some center point  implies the presence of an inward acceleration  toward the center of the circle.  So as a consequence of that, a rotating reference frame,  for example, a reference frame that  rotates with the Earth's rotation,  is accelerated relative to an inertial frame.  This results in a fictitious force  that has two terms, a centrifugal term and a Coriolis  term.  You may have come across this Coriolis force  and centrifugal force before.  These are examples of fictitious forces  because they arise from the choice of coordinate system.  They're an artificial force.  They don't correspond to actual, physical interactions,  but are an artifact of the rotating, non-inertial  coordinate system.  Now, in this course we will confine ourselves  to inertial reference frames.  And therefore, we'll only be considering  real, physical forces and interactions.  However, there are advanced applications  where the use of a non-inertial frame has certain advantages.  And you may encounter those as you  go to more advanced courses. 