 MICHEL DEGRAFF: From the very beginning  of this course is designed for this semester,  we wanted to connect the humanities, the classroom,  with social justice.  And luckily, we had guest speakers  who themselves have been engaged in social change.  So for example, I mentioned before John Turman.  There was also Professor Fox Harrell.  In fact, most of our guest speakers  have been engaged in real life trying to make change  for social justice.  And because some of our students were themselves  children of immigrants, many of them  got very interested, for example,  in the issue of migration.  Or to protect the rights of migrants  who had been under attack in the recent couple of years.  Thanks to John Turman, some of the students  connected to the MIRA group, which  is the Massachusetts Immigrant and Refugee Advocacy coalition.  And they were actually very happy to do so,  to be able to connect not only the personal biographies,  but also the classroom work with actual action  for social change.  And we also got to understand the ways in which  what we are studying in this course--  for example, the issue of language and assimilation--  have impacts, say, in the courtroom.  So the issue of language and assimilation  was particularly evident in the court case of George Zimmerman.  The trial of--  Zimmerman was accused of killing Trayvon Martin.  This young black boy who was seen in his neighborhood  after seeing his dad and he was--  after he bought some Skittles and some drinks  and he was killed by this vigilante.  And the reason why he was acquitted  is because the star witness for the prosecution, Rachel  Jeantel, who happened to be this young woman of Haitian  and Dominican decent, and because of the way she spoke,  she spoke with a black accent.  And that accent, undermined her credibility.  In fact, some of the jurors were clear  that they would not believe her because she sounded--  because of the way she spoke.  And there's a beautiful analysis of this episode--  a very sad episode-- by John Rickford  and Sharese King in the journal, the journal Language,  where they showed very clearly that that  was the main factor for Rachel Jeantel  to not be believed by the jury.  So here this is a clear case where  attitudes towards language have an impact on social justice. 