 The following content is provided under a Creative  Commons license.  Your support will help MIT OpenCourseWare  continue to offer high-quality educational resources for free.  To make a donation or view additional materials  from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT OpenCourseWare  at ocw.mit.edu.  JOHN ESSIGMANN: Let's go now to storyboard 36,  starting with panel A, Regulation of Metabolism.  So far in 5.07, we have looked at metabolic pathways  from the perspective of the cell in organelles within the cell.  Using physiological scenarios, I've  tried to show you how pathways within the cell  respond to a change in the environment, for example,  by running away from a stressor, such as a dog  or dealing with the problems of starvation or diabetes.  We have looked a little bit at the ways  that individual steps and pathways are regulated.  We have not, however, looked at the ways  that individual pathways and individual organs  coordinate their respective activities in order  to accommodate the needs of the entire organism.  Coordinated pathway networking is the focus of this lecture.  Let's turn to panel B. I'm going to start out  by talking a little bit about the seven pathways  that we have studied in detail in 5.07  and look at how they're regulated.  As I've said before, typically pathways  are regulated at their rate-determining steps, that  is, the step at which you'll find an enzyme that  has a large free-energy change associated  with the conversion of substrates to products.  In the first pathway we studied, glycolysis,  there are three irreversible steps, specifically  the glucokinase/hexokinase step; secondly,  the phosphofructokinase-1 step; and thirdly, the last step,  pyruvate kinase.  These are all sites of pathway regulation.  Our second pathway, the tricarboxylic acid cycle,  or Krebs cycle, was regulated at every step at which NADH  is produced, that is, citrate dehydrogenase,  alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase,  and malate dehydrogenase.  While pyruvate dehydrogenase is not formally  part of the TCA cycle, I'll point out here  that it is also regulated by NADH.  In all four cases, NADH feedback inhibits  the enzymes that produce it.  Under conditions of excessive TCA cycle activity,  you'll find that NADH levels will drop,  and accordingly NAD+ levels will increase.  The reduction in NADH will result  in activation of the pathway.  In other words, the disappearance of NADH  results in the uninhibition of the pathway.  Our third pathway, gluconeogenesis,  is regulated at the pyruvate carboxylase step  at the fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase step  and at the glycogen synthase/glycogen phosphorylase  steps.  We're going to be looking at this pathway in some detail  in a little while.  Our fourth pathway, fatty acid catabolism,  is regulated at the CAT, or Carnitine Acyltransferase step,  which is inhibited by malonyl coenzyme A. Malonyl CoA  is one of the key precursors for fatty acid biosynthesis.  It makes sense that the concentration  of malonyl coenzyme A, if high, would  inhibit the uptake of fatty acids  into the mitochondrial matrix.  Keep in mind that uptake into the matrix is the job of CAT1.  Shutting down CAT1 by the high concentration of malonyl CoA  prevents entry of fatty acids into the mitochondrial matrix,  where they otherwise would be subjected to beta-oxidation.  By turning off CAT1, malonyl coenzyme A  prevents the futile cycle of simultaneous fatty acid  degradation and biosynthesis.  The fifth pathway is fatty acid biosynthesis.  Acetyl-CoA Carboxylase, or ACC, is the enzyme  that makes malonyl coenzyme A out of its precursor,  acetyl coenzyme A. This enzyme, ACC, is activated by insulin.  As we've seen before, insulin detects the fed state  in the organism.  Hence, following a meal, insulin levels rise,  and that's the signal that tells the cells of the body  to take up nutrients.  That's just one example.  After a meal, glucose levels will rise in the blood.  Insulin will be released and drive the glucose  into the cell.  The cell will then activate pathways  by which the glucose is converted to acetyl-CoA.  Then the acetyl-CoA will be converted into fatty acids,  and then ultimately, into triacylglycerides  for energy storage.  Our sixth regulated pathway is the pentose phosphate pathway.  Glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase  is the first step in the pathway.  And as we often see, an early or committed step  is where regulation happens.  One of the products of the pentose phosphate  pathway is NADPH.  If the cell has used a lot of NADPH,  for example for biosynthesis, its levels will drop.  Coordinately, there will be an increase in NADP+.  In the case of glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase,  we find that NADP+, which is the product of excessive reductive  biosynthesis, as well as other activities,  such as combating oxidative stress,  activates the dehydrogenase in order to enable the synthesis  of additional NADPH in order to sustain biosynthesis.  The last pathway, the seventh, is electron transport  and oxidative phosphorylation.  This is our most robust pathway for the production of ATP.  When there's a lot of demand for ATP,  ADP levels will rise in the cell.  And it's ultimately the level of ADP  that regulates electron transport  in oxidative phosphorylation.  More about that in a few minutes.  Let's now look at panel C. Organs communicate  with one another by the nervous system, of course,  but also by hormones, small molecules that  are secreted by one organ that will  have an effect at one or more organs  distal to the first organ.  Changes in our environment are detected  by the brain with input from our sensory organs.  Our internal organs, such as the liver, pancreas, kidneys,  adrenal glands, and muscles will detect signals,  either independently of the brain or after an instruction  set is received from the brain.  The resulting signal network will allow the entire organism  to be able to adapt to the new environment,  be it one of stress, for example, being chased by a dog,  or one of, for example, hunger.  We'll talk later about the adrenal glands, which  are going to respond to signals that  come in from sensory organs that tell our muscles to start  running and to tell the liver to start to provide  the muscles with the glucose they need in order  to sustain running.  Later we'll be looking in some detail  at the adrenal-produced hormone epinephrine, also called  adrenaline.  Adrenaline will have a profound impact, both in the muscles  and in the liver, to allow these organs  to do their respective jobs.  The pancreas is a very important organ  in that it provides exocrine functions that  help with digestion and endocrine  functions that enable us to regulate or balance  fuel metabolism.  The alpha cells of the pancreas produce glucagon.  The alpha cells sense hunger.  They secrete glucagon into the blood,  which travels to organs that represent our fuel depots.  And fuel from those depots, for example, fatty acids  and glucose, will then be supplied  to other tissues of the body that are in need of nutrition.  The beta cells of the pancreas sense  what we call the fed state, and they produce insulin.  Insulin instructs the various organs  of the body to take up fuel in the wake of us  having eaten a meal.  Now let's look at panel D. There are  three general paradigms by which pathways are regulated.  The three hormones that I've just mentioned typically  will cause the activation of a kinase that will phosphorylate  a target protein, resulting in either increased or decreased  activity of that protein.  We call this hormonal or, more properly, covalent control,  because there will be a covalent modification of a protein that  will be responsible for pathway regulation.  The second major paradigm by which pathways are controlled  is allosteric regulation.  Earlier in 5.07, JoAnne Stubbe showed us  how hemoglobin, the molecule that  carries oxygen in the blood, is controlled  by bisphosphoglycerate and protons, which  act as allosteric effectors.  Similarly, other small molecule effectors  will control the major pathways of metabolism.  We're going to be looking at phosphofructokinase-1  as our prime example.  The third strategy of regulation is  what I call "acceptor control."  This is the way that electron transport and oxidative  phosphorylation are regulated.  To the right side of panel D is an abbreviated metabolic  pathway that I'm going to use to describe each of these three  paradigms.  At the upper left is a box that contains  glycogen synthase and glycogen phosphorylase.  Earlier in 5.07, I told you how phosphorylation  of a specific C-ring residue on glycogen  phosphorylase results in a dramatic increase  in the activity of that enzyme.  A little later, we'll see that covalent modification, again,  by serine phosphorylation of glycogen synthase, results  in a decrease in activity of that enzyme.  Hence, covalent modification of these two proteins  enables, in one case, activation of the enzyme  and, in the other case, inhibition of the enzyme.  This reciprocal control prevents futile cycling.  Now let's look at the box in the center  of this abbreviated metabolic pathway.  The glycolytic enzyme, PFK-1, Phosphofructokinase-1,  converts fructose 6-phosphate to fructose 1,6-bisphosphate.  We're going to see that a small molecule derivative of fructose  6-phosphate, specifically fructose 2,6-bisphosphate,  will act as a powerful allosteric stimulator of PFK-1.  I'll also point out that AMP, Adenosine Monophosphate,  will also stimulate this enzyme.  I'll also point out here that PFK-1 is a tetramer.  Oftentimes, as JoAnne taught us, proteins that are multimers  are the ones that are subject to allosteric regulation.  Our third paradigm of regulation is accepter control,  shown in the box at the bottom of panel D.  During periods of intense physical activity,  ATP is consumed and converted to ADP,  and NADH is converted to NAD+.  Rising levels of ADP in the mitochondrial matrix  activate the proton-translocating ATP  synathase.  As more protons flow through the synthase, more ATP is made.  They call this accepter control, because the regulatory molecule  is ADP, which is the, quote unquote, "acceptor  of phosphate" in the synthesis of ATP.  Because we covered accepter control  in some detail in the lecture on electron transport  and oxidative phosphorylation, I'm  going to leave that topic for now  and focus on covalent control and allosteric control.  Let's turn now to storyboard 37, starting  with panel A. With regard to the paradigm of covalent control,  I'm going to focus on the pair of enzymes, glycogen  synthase and glycogen phosphorylase,  which reciprocally regulate glycogen synthesis  and glycogenolysis.  Let's consider a scenario in which  there's some kind of stressor.  The muscles have to be activated in order  to be able to deal with the stress,  and the liver has to be able to provide the resources  to the muscles that will allow the muscles to continue  intense physical activity.  Now let's look at panel B. In our scenario,  you've just seen something frightening.  Your brain then sends an electrical signal  to the adrenal glands, which then  send a chemical signal, specifically adrenaline,  to the liver and to the muscles.  At the top part of this response scenario,  both the liver and muscles are going  to be responding in a very similar way.  However, at the bottom part of the response scenario,  the liver and muscles are going to be activating  very different pathways.  Specifically, we're going to see that muscles will strongly  activate glycolytic pathways in order  to enable the production of ATP to keep the muscles running.  The liver, by contrast, is going to be activating pathways that  are more like those of gluconeogenesis, that is,  spilling out fuel from the liver to provide  the muscles with the energy-rich resources  that it needs to keep us running away from our stressor.  Adrenaline, or epinephrine, travels from the adrenal  glands through the blood.  It takes only a second or two for this to happen.  It's received by the liver and the muscles  at the beta-adrenergic receptor.  The blood concentration of epinephrine is very low,  something of the order of 10 to the minus 10  molar at this point.  There's going to be a very substantial signal  amplification as we move ahead.  Keep in mind for later that the initial triggering  signal is in the 10 to the minus 10 molar range.  The arrival of epinephrine at the receptor  results in structural changes in the transmembrane domain  of the beta-adrenergic receptor.  The signal is received by a heterotrimeric G  protein, shown as the circle with alpha, beta, and gamma  subunits.  This G protein, in its inactive state,  has a bound molecule of GDP, that is, guanosine diphosphate.  Upon receipt of the signal from the beta-adrenergic receptor,  the heterotrimeric G protein ejects the beta and gamma  subunits, and the GDP molecule, which is non-covalently bound,  is released.  The GDP is replaced by a GTP, guanosine triphosphate.  This replacement results in the formation  of the alpha subunit with a non-covalently bound GTP.  This is the active form of the enzyme.  It translocates along the inner surface of the membrane  until it encounters AC, or adenyl cyclase.  The GTP-bound G protein activates adenyl cyclase.  The activated AC dynamically starts  converting ATP, which is very abundant in the cell,  into cyclic AMP.  We call cyclic AMP the second messenger.  In our scenario, the first messenger  is epinephrine, which interacted with  the beta-adrenergic receptor.  The second messenger is cyclic AMP,  which is produced by the activation of adenyl cyclase,  which is asymmetrically associated  with the inner surface of the cell's membrane.  Let's turn now to panel C. In the upper left of panel C,  you'll see a box.  This box depicts the chemical mechanism  leading to the production of cyclic AMP.  Let's now look at the main part of the panel.  In a very short period of time, a matter  of seconds, the concentration of cyclic AMP within the cell  goes from about 1 micromolar up to about 5 micromolar.  So the presence of epinephrine at the 10 to the minus 10  molar concentration outside the cell  results in a perturbation of cyclic AMP concentrations  inside the cell, bringing cyclic AMP concentration to about 10  to the minus 6 molar.  This is a very substantial increase  in signal, which an engineer would call gain.  The increasing cyclic AMP concentration  is going to activate a kinase cascade.  And the initial kinase that's going to be activated  is called Protein Kinase A, or PKA,  which is represented symbolically as a C  with a circle around it in my drawing.  In its inactive state, protein kinase A  is in a complex involving two molecules of itself  and two molecules of a regulatory protein, which  I've indicated as an R in the middle of a circle.  Cyclic AMP forms a tight complex with R.  This basically causes R to dissociate  from the active subunit C, that is,  the catalytic portion of protein kinase  A. The catalytic portion of protein kinase A  is now free to act as a kinase to phosphorylate  the next kinase in the cascade, which  is called SPK, or Synthase Phosphorylase Kinase.  A serine residue on SPK is phosphorylated,  and that event converts this kinase into its active form.  I'll also point out that one of the subunits,  the delta subunit of SPK, is the calcium-binding protein  calmodulin, which gives a second level of regulation  to this enzyme.  Specifically, this enzyme is regulated  not only by the concentration of cyclic AMP,  but also by the levels of calcium within the cell.  The activated SPK, or synthase phosphorylase kinase,  is now going to phosphorylate two other proteins, glycogen  phosphorylase and glycogen synthase.  As I mentioned earlier, phosphorylation of glycogen  phosphorylase results in the enzyme becoming more active.  That is, it starts breaking down glycogen by phosphorolysis  to produce glucose 1-phosphate, which  will then be available for further metabolic processing.  In the muscle, glucose 1-phosphate  will be converted by phosphoglucomutase  into glucose 6-phosphate, which will then be a substrate  to initiate glycolysis, with the ultimate generation of lots  of ATP for the muscle.  In the liver, phosphoglucomutase will  convert glucose 1-phosphate into glucose 6-phosphate,  but in this case, gluconeogenesis  will be activated.  Glucose 6-phosphatase will remove the phosphate  from glucose 6-phosphate, converting it to glucose.  The glucose will then be secreted from the liver,  go out into the blood, and then go  to the muscle to help the muscle carry out glycolysis.  Now let's look at the other target of SPK,  synthase phosphorylase kinase, specifically,  glycogen synthase.  In this case, glycogen synthase phosphorylation results  in a less active protein, and hence, glycogen synthesis  will cease.  This makes sense, because a cell under stress  would not want to be making glycogen. It wants to be using  energy and not storing fuel.  Let's step back and look at the big picture at this point.  The interaction of a hormone resulted  in the covalent modification of proteins.  One of those phosphorylated proteins,  glycogen phosphorylase, triggered glycogen breakdown.  Phosphorylation of a second protein, glycogen synthase,  turned it off.  Turning off glycogen synthase helped  us avoid the otherwise futile simultaneous synthesis  and breakdown of glycogen.  So overall, this is an example of a hormone causing  covalent modification of proteins in such a way  that it altered the activity of those proteins  in a manner that made sense given  the physiological challenges to the organism.  Next, let's turn to storyboard 38,  panel A. Our next regulatory paradigm  will be the use of allosteric effectors  to regulate a pathway.  As before, I'm going to use the physiological scenario  of stress.  But in this case, I'm going to show  how stress will cause the production  of small-molecule allosteric effectors  that will activate glycolysis in the muscle  and activate gluconeogenesis in the liver.  Our focal point is going to be PFK-1, phosphofructokinase-1,  of glycolysis.  Of central importance is going to be a small molecule,  fructose 2,6-bisphosphate, which we'll see is going to be a very  powerful allosteric stimulant of PFK-1.  Fructose 2,6-bisphosphate is made by the enzyme PFK-2,  phosphofructokinase-2.  Let's start out by looking at the very  short biochemical pathway shown in panel A. We see glucose  converted by hexokinase or glucokinase  to glucose 6-phosphate and then some equilibrium  steps up until we get fructose 6-phosphate.  Ordinarily, we think of fructose 6-phosphate  as continuing in the glycolytic pathway,  but let's not think of it that way right now.  The chemical structure of fructose 6-phosphate  is shown slightly to the right.  Note that fructose 6-phosphate has  a phosphate on the 6-hydroxyl group,  and that the 1-hydroxyl functionality  has only a hydrogen.  This is the alpha anomer of fructose,  as evidenced by the fact that the hydroxyl group on carbon-2,  the anomeric position, is down, or under the furanose ring.  With a little bit of electron pushing,  you can change the stereochemistry  at the 2-carbon such that the hydroxyl group would be up,  or in the beta configuration.  In the beta configuration, the hydroxymethyl group  of fructose 6-phosphate, which includes its 1-carbon,  would be down.  The beta and alpha-anomers of fructose 6-phosphate  are in equilibrium.  That is, they both exist at the same time.  The kinase, phosphofructokinase-2,  catches the beta anomer of fructose 6-phosphate  and phosphorylates it, producing the molecule at the lower  right of this panel.  That's the actual structure of fructose 2,6-bisphosphate.  This is the molecule that's going  to serve as the allosteric effector  of the glycolysis pathway.  The PFK-2, or phosphofructokinase-2 enzyme,  is shown to the left.  It's a complex enzyme having lots  of different functionalities.  The hatched circle within the larger circle at the top  represents the phosphofructokinase domain,  which converts fructose 6-phosphate to fructose  2,6-bisphosphate.  That is the structure at the lower right.  The hatched domain at the bottom is the fructose bisphosphatase  domain.  This is an unusual enzyme.  In the top domain, it acts as a kinase, in the bottom domain,  acts as a phosphatase.  PFK-2 has two hydroxylated amino acids,  one at about 3 o'clock as drawn and the other at about 6  o'clock.  When the hydroxyl group at the bottom  is present as a pure, unmodified hydroxyl group,  the protein acts as a kinase.  When the 6 o'clock domain is phosphorylated,  the enzyme acts as a phosphatase.  Protein kinase A, or PKA, from the previous storyboard,  where we talked about hormonal regulation,  is the kinase that phosphorylates  the hydroxyl group at 6 o'clock on the protein.  As we'll see later, the hydroxyl group at 3 o'clock  is targeted by a kinase called AMP kinase in the muscle.  Before we go on, I want you to look carefully at the structure  of fructose 2,6-bisphosphate at the bottom right of panel A.  Compare that structure with the structure of fructose  1,6-bisphosphate at the right in panel B.  If you squint and look at these two molecules,  you'll see that they look remarkably alike.  In both cases, the phosphate group  is above the plane of the furanose sugar.  However, in the case of fructose 2,6-bisphosphate,  the phosphate is on the 2-carbon,  whereas with fructose 1,6-bisphosphate,  the phosphate is on the 1-carbon.  The way these molecules look will become important  in a few minutes.  Now let's take a look at the pathway  as shown in panel B. Panel B reflects  the liver in its normal, that is, non-stress state.  So this is just the liver doing everyday liver business.  Glucokinase of the liver is converting glucose  to glucose 6-phosphate.  The alpha anomer of fructose 6-phosphate is produced.  Most of the fructose 6-phosphate is converted to fructose  1,6-bisphosphate.  In the liver cell at this time, there's  probably some low level of glycolytic activity going on.  However, because of natural anomerization,  some of the alpha-fructose 6-phosphate  is converted to its beta-anomer.  Phosphofructokinase-2, or PFK-2, is shown to the lower left,  and it's active.  Note that neither of its hydroxyl groups, at this point,  are phosphorylated.  And its kinase site will be converting the beta-fructose  6-phosphate anomer to its phosphorylated form, that is,  beta-fructose 2,6-bisphosphate, which has the structure shown  at the bottom right of the previous panel.  Fructose 2,6-bisphosphate is a positive allosteric effector  of phosphofructokinase-1.  So it facilitates the glycolytic pathway  that is enabling net flux from left to right in the pathway  as shown.  In addition to stimulating glycolysis,  fructose 2,6-bisphosphate strongly inhibits  gluconeogenesis.  It does this by binding at the active site of fructose  1,6-bisphosphatase, the gluconeogenic enzyme,  clogging up the active site, and thus disabling  the gluconeogenic pathway.  The reason that it's such a good inhibitor of gluconeogenesis  stems from an examination, once again,  of the structures of fructose 2,6-bisphosphate in the bottom  right of the previous panel and fructose 1,6-bisphosphate shown  to the right on this panel.  Keep in mind that fructose 1,6-bisphosphate,  while it's the product in glycolysis,  is the substrate for the gluconeogenic reaction.  If the active site of the fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase is  clogged by fructose 2,6-bisphosphate,  then it's not going to be able to process the fructose  1,6-bisphosphate in the gluconeogenic direction.  Hence, gluconeogenesis is strongly inhibited.  All of the above shows us that fructose 2,6-bisphosphate is  really important.  It stimulates the forward direction  in the liver that is causing glycolysis to have  a net flux from left to right.  And in addition, it strongly inhibits the back reaction,  that is, the reaction in the gluconeogenic direction.  Turn at this point to panel C. Now let's ramp up the scenario  and think about a situation in which you're  being chased by a dog.  You want to be able to generate glucose in the liver  and then export that glucose to the muscles  so that you can run away from your foe.  This is a situation in which you would like to have your liver  stop doing glycolysis.  You want the liver to strongly turn to gluconeogenesis  in order to manufacture glucose for the muscle.  At this point, refer back to the storyboard  that dealt with covalent control, where protein kinase  A was activated.  Recall the part of the lecture when  I talked about covalent control, and we  were talking about the glycogen phosphorylase  step in the liver.  In the liver, we generated first glucose 1-phosphate  and then glucose 6-phosphate.  And then the phosphate was lopped off the glucose  6-phosphate to produce glucose that went out into the blood.  In the present case, we're looking  at a step that's further down in the gluconeogenesis pathway.  Specifically, we want to activate the fructose  1,6-bisphosphatase in order to push even more carbohydrate  toward the production of glucose.  So in panel C, we see stress inducing the cyclic AMP cascade  that results in activation of protein kinase A. And protein  kinase A is going to phosphorylate  the southernmost, that is, 6 o'clock domain, on the PFK-2,  or phosphofructokinase-2 protein.  As I indicated earlier, phosphorylation  of the 6 o'clock domain results in conversion  of phosphofructokinase-2 from a kinase into a phosphatase.  The phosphatase produced from PFK-2 will act upon the pool  of fructose 2,6-bisphosphate and convert that pool to fructose  6-phosphate.  That is, the 2-phosphate will be lopped off of the fructose  2,6-bisphosphate molecule.  By doing this biochemistry in the liver,  we've done two things.  First, we destroyed the fructose 2,6-bisphosphate pool.  Hence, this molecule is no longer  available to act as an allosteric stimulator of PFK-1.  Secondly, removing fructose 2,6-bisphosphate from the pool  has resulted in removal of the active-site inhibitor  of fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase.  This enzyme, therefore, becomes active  and is able to push the net flux of carbon  from right to left in the direction of gluconeogenesis,  producing glucose that will then spill out into the blood.  Please turn now to panel D. We just  saw that the liver, post-stress, produces glucose.  Now we're going to take a look at the muscle, which,  of course, is going to be using that glucose.  In response to the stress state, the muscle  is going to activate an enzyme called  the AMP-dependent protein kinase,  or AMP kinase, also known as AMPK.  AMPK activates metabolic pathways that generate ATP.  The 3 o'clock phosphorylated PFK-2 proves to be  an exceptionally competent enzyme for converting fructose  6-phosphate into fructose 2,6-bisphosphate.  This increases further the concentration of fructose  2,6-bisphosphate in the muscle cytoplasmic pool.  And keep in mind that fructose 2,6-bisphosphate itself is  a powerful allosteric stimulator of glycolysis by its effect  on PFK-1.  So in the muscle cell, we're able to achieve extraordinarily  high concentrations of fructose 2,6-bisphosphate,  thus favoring glycolysis.  Let's turn now to storyboard 39.  Let's start with panel A. The way  that AMP kinase stimulates glycolysis in the muscle  post-stress is illustrated in this abbreviated metabolic  pathway.  Starting at the lower left, the stressor  has created the cyclic AMP cascade  that activates AMP kinase.  AMP kinase phosphorylates the 3 o'clock domain on PFK-2,  converting it to its phosphorylated derivative that  shows powerful kinase activity to convert fructose 6-phosphate  into fructose 2,6-bisphosphate.  This enhanced pool of fructose 2,6-bisphosphate will now act  as a powerful allosteric stimulator of PFK-1 to favor  glycolysis.  I want to point out that muscles do not do gluconeogenesis.  Only the liver and renal cortex do this pathway.  So muscles do not have fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase,  the gluconeogenic enzyme.  Accordingly, in muscles we don't have  to worry about gluconeogenesis being turned on to some extent  and thus dampening the glycolytic effect  in the muscle that's needed in order for the muscle  to generate the ATP needed to outrun your foe.  On this panel, we also see that there  are several other effectors that influence  the activity of PFK-1.  One is citrate.  Another is ATP.  Another one is AMP, or Adenosine Monophosphate.  I want to say a couple of words about AMP in this regard.  Let's look at panel B. AMP is not as powerful an allosteric  effector on PFK-1 as is fructose 2,6-bisphosphate.  But we know a lot about its activity  as an allosteric effector because it's  been studied quite thoroughly.  PFK-1 is a tetramer, and its activity  is regulated by cooperativity.  This graph shows the activity of PFK-1  as a function of the concentration of one  of its substrates, fructose 6-phosphate.  When there's no ATP present, which  is not a realistic situation, you  see the regulatory pattern following that  of a rectangular hyperbola.  That's scenario A.  Scenario B shows what would happen  to the activity of the enzyme when  ATP is present at a concentration of about  1 millimolar, which is quite realistic,  and what you see is suppressed activity.  When the heterotropic allosteric effector AMP is added,  you see the curve shift to the left.  That is, you get enhanced activity at a given substrate  concentration.  My guess is that fructose 2,6-bisphosphate would push  the curve even further to the left.  Let's now look at panel C. I think it's useful to use AMP  to help us construct a model for what fructose 2,6-bisphosphate  might be doing as an allosteric stimulator of the PFK-1 enzyme.  The equilibrium diagram that I've drawn  shows the relationship between the relaxed, that  is, more active state of the PFK-1 tetramer,  and the tense, that is, more inactive state of the enzyme.  When ATP is abundant within a cell,  it binds more strongly to the tense state,  and hence, ATP inactivates PFK-1.  This makes sense, because if ATP is abundant,  you do not want to be doing glycolysis  to make even more ATP.  However, when the ATP pool of a cell  is challenged by doing heavy work or biosynthesis,  the AMP is going to bind more tightly  to the R state of PFK-1.  And that's going to help convert the enzyme  into its more active state.  That's a little snapshot of how a small molecule, in this case,  AMP or perhaps fructose 2,6-bisphosphate can  dramatically regulate the activity of an enzyme  at a specific step in metabolism. 