 GUEST SPEAKER: I convened this meeting  because I believe that the review is limited  as it stands now.  And in order for the Environmental Impact Assessment  to be effective, it needs to consider  a number of other alternatives in order  to provide a larger scope for the project impacts,  both positive and negative.  The draft Environmental Impact Assessment, as it stands now,  considers the number of turbines,  the location of the turbines, and a very limited  no-build option.  This alternatives analysis fails to create  a clear vision of the situational context  of the project.  In this presentation, I will be discussing  ways in which we can revise the Environmental Impact  Assessment so that it better evaluates all alternatives  and I will provide arguments for why it is necessary to spend  the time and money to do so.  First, we need to define the goal of the project  if we are to effectively evaluate  alternative approaches.  Alternatives analysis should paint  a picture of the multitude of options  available to reach this goal.  So I believe that the goal of the project  is to provide energy for the growing electricity  demand in the region.  And studies have shown that new energy facilities will  need to be built within the next 15 years  to meet this growing demand.  So we should use this goal to frame to project evaluation.  And sending a clear goal at the beginning  helps to consider better alternatives.  And it's necessary to take a step back  and to see the project and its impacts in the larger context.  So if we all agree to this, that the goal is to meet the growing  electricity demand, we must determine that this product  is the best option.  And the Environmental Impact Assessment  is the way that we'll do that.  So to do this, we need to make three major revisions  to the Environmental Impact Assessment.  One, we need to consider alternative forms  of energy production and their environmental,  economic, and social impacts if this plant is not to be build.  So if we do not build offshore wind,  we would build wind farms on land.  And what will the land use impacts of that be?  Will we need to build a natural gas plant to meet demand,  or is solar an option?  So we need to really consider the greater alternatives.  It will be difficult to do a full Environmental Impact  Assessment of all of these theoretical alternatives.  We can pick a few items to focus on, for instance, carbon  emissions or land use.  Second, we need to consider the impacts of wildlife  and coastal communities based on cumulative impacts,  if this project isn't built and other clean energy products are  not built and we're not meeting our greenhouse gas emission  targets.  Third, if this project is perhaps  the best way to meet our energy needs,  then we need to consider alternative ways  to mitigate the impacts from this project on wildlife  and navigation.  Some mitigation efforts could include  moving the wind farm further offshore or presenting--  providing better long term monitoring.  So including all of these alternatives  in the more comprehensive alternatives  analysis will lead to two major benefits.  One, it will increase the opportunity for public buy-in  by making a more transparent process.  This is really important for complex problems  like energy development.  And by including a more comprehensive analysis,  or alternatives analysis, the project  will be less likely to be fought later on.  Because the public will be better able to use  this document to see the decision-making process.  The public will see that the Environmental Impact Assessment  did not just consider the impacts of the proposed  pre-design project that was already going to happen  but will see it in a greater context  of the different alternatives that  were considered along the way.  This will, while spending this money upfront,  it will be expensive to do all of these extra studies,  it will be important in saving money down the pipeline  in delays and litigation.  And second, because there is not much precedent  for Environmental Impact Assessments of offshore wind  in the United States, we have the opportunity  to set the standards for evaluation.  This project will set best practices,  so let's make them best practices  and establish mitigation and monitoring practices as well as  the robust alternatives analysis that I proposed.  Again, we should, we should be sure to engage  the public around this alternatives  analysis during the review of this draft, the comments  on this draft Environmental Impact Assessment,  so that there's public buy-in and support of the project  and that the public understands what alternative options would  look like.  So finally, we need to recognize that, internally as the EPA,  that Environmental Impact Assessments are not  unbiased and purely scientific, but that they operate  within a political framework.  So because of this and because of our recent decision  to limit greenhouse gas emissions in power plants,  we need to create a better framework  for analyzing alternative energy projects  and present a better framework for analyzing  all of those impacts and risks.  We cannot encourage clean energy development at a great cost  to local ecosystems.  But we must create a system in which  a sound case for wind generation can be made, including--  So this, by doing this, we need to examine,  have an assessment that examines all other options,  including meeting energy needs from less clean sources.  So for these reasons, I recommend  revising the draft Environment Impact Assessment  to include these comments.  Thank you. 