 PROFESSOR: Distinguished members of the city council--  good morning, and thank you for meeting with me.  As you know, we will be working with a municipal planning  agency in the drafting of the new master plan for the city.  I address you today because as a first step in the process,  our team requires the council's full support in what we believe  is the best planning framework to achieve the city's two  primary objective-- economic development  in the long term and short-term pollution reduction.  We are aware that not just the city,  but a different set of stakeholders  must work together in order to counter  the impacts of the regional wastewater treatment plant  and the runoff from agricultural activities  upstream that currently discourage investment  in the city.  With this in mind, we propose a combination  of community planning assisted by consensus building exercises  as a pivot for design and implementation of the new plan.  I will spend the next few minutes  explaining how participation will  enhance the value of the plan, highlight aspects of community  building for this space, and conclude  with a particular focus we will use for your city.  Having worked over 15 years in planning efforts  and over 20 different cities, my experience  has taught me that meaningful public participation  is the seed of successful implementation.  Many times I have seen sophisticated master plans  neglecting this fact and as a result,  waste of taxpayers' money because the community perceives  the method as being unfair.  When plans do not connect assessment and design  with public will, this often ends up  hindering economic development by giving way to social unrest  and expensive delays in plans.  Money spent on a planning process instead of a planning  report can truly be called investment  in the public interest.  Participation has a triple bottom line.  It brings additional skills to the planning table,  it provides alternative insights to diminish  risk of economic failure, and generates  learning and cooperation networks  that transcend the plan itself.  We will pursue these benefits through a community planning  exercise where a neutral body will map the main stakeholder  groups surrounding our polluted river.  Peers within the groups will choose a representative  that will participate in having an informed discussion  about the alternatives for environmental improvement  of the city.  I am aware that public participation is not  deeply ingrained in local institutional culture.  In fact, initial conversations with the staff  indicate some reserve.  This is not unusual because of narrow  and procedural applications of public presentation  elsewhere have definitely set a poor precedent.  In the absence of proper management,  public hearings and consultations  are often inefficient and only yield superficial discussions.  Other times the are held hostage by the best organized groups.  With such references, I find it to be  very understandable for any of you  to take public participation with some degree of skepticism.  In order to address these concerns,  my team and I will combine community planning  with consensus building exercises.  In comparison to other strategies,  this framework will use a mutual mediator  that will add credibility and efficiency to the process.  Strive for plurality instead of statistical representativeness,  which is not only expensive but also  ensures that there is a level playing field preventing  majority rules.  The mediator will curate participating groups early  in the process ensuring a fair voice  that reflects your economic concerns  and also that ensures that the rich, racial diversity  of the city is represented at the table.  Finally, this framework will guarantee recommendations  that are feasible because all will be required  to be grounded on a technical expertise provided  by an advisory committee.  Due to little experience with participation in the city,  the outline of the process we proposed  is similar to the one we very successfully used  in Hampton, Virginia, where there was emphasis in learning.  Participants will be trained about river pollution,  the implications of green investment,  and different alternatives to promote economic development.  This will enable full and detailed participation  in the discussion on the proposed Will alternatives.  We are not asking you to give up authority in this matter.  You remain the ultimate decision-makers  to weigh these proposals on their merit.  This exercise is for, and you will  have an unprecedented insight to a range of the concerns of all  of your constituents.  I do request, however, your endorsement  to a public commitment that considers  the inclusion of the negotiated recommendations  in the new plan.  I conclude by pointing out that this method is  relatively inexpensive as compared to others.  An assessment does not need much time or money.  Furthermore, investment and consensus  yields great legitimacy and trust.  And with this, the greatest opportunity  to achieve fair, efficient wise and stable commitments  to come and go.  Thank you.  [APPLAUSE] 