 GUEST SPEAKER: Dear Governor, as you  know, we're currently facing a controversy  around the funding for cleanup of a highly polluted Superfund  site.  Before delving into some details,  I wanted to divide my talk into three parts.  First, I'll walk you through why this has become  a controversial topic today.  Secondly, I'll walk you through how  you can apply cost-benefit analysis  in this particular case.  And finally, I'll close with some observations  around possible gaps and recommendations  on how to move forward.  So first some background.  A decade ago some abandoned underground storage tanks  from a former foundry leaked into neighboring wetlands.  Given that the company had gone out of business,  it was impossible to hold them to account  for the cost of the cleanup.  As a result, we put in $3 million to cap the site  and sequester the polluted water and soil.  Today this issues resurfaced because the city wants  to build a new mall on the site and has requested  that the state government fund the construction of a road that  would link this area near an interstate.  This sparked debate around who should  fund the cleanup, which is estimated to cost $35 million.  The local government argues that the economic benefits  of the mall on this site will be widespread so the state should  cover these costs.  However, the transportation agency  believes that the developers should cover these costs given  that they will gain much of the economic benefits.  To develop a position, you asked me to work on a cost benefit  analysis, and I'll walk you through the process  of this analysis.  As you know the purpose of a cost benefit analysis  is to determine whether the social benefits exceed  the social costs.  The benefits are an increase in the human environmental  well-being, while the costs are the reductions  in this well-being.  To sum the benefits, we would calculate the willingness  to pay for benefits or accept compensation  for any losses that might occur.  We also determine the standing, in other words,  the stakeholders whose costs and benefits are to be considered,  and the time over which these costs and benefits are  to be counted and discounted over time.  Finally, to compare the costs and benefits,  we use that present value.  In other words, the discount of these values over time.  And then that present value is important  because it helps us rank our options.  And we should only consider implementing  those that have a positive net present value.  For this particular case here are  some of the most important direct  and indirect costs and benefits that we could focus on.  Some of the potential costs of development of this mall  would be the actual cleanup of the site  and the ongoing monitoring of any lingering contamination,  certifying compliance and authorizing  sites for redevelopment, building, maintaining a road  or necessary structures such as bridges or parking lots,  loss of revenue of existing local and state businesses,  increased traffic, as well as air and noise pollution  in the area and any resulting shifts in demographics  of these areas.  Some potential benefits could be economic activity  and generation of business revenues, employments, wages,  and benefits that can affect household income, which  in turn can propel the economy, and state and local taxes  can increase revenue for the government.  It's important to note that many of these issues  can be seen as either cost or benefits  depending on different stakeholders point of view.  For example, a large new mall could  increase the property value in some surrounding areas  and decrease it in others.  As far as time frame, it would be  important to capture each phase involved  from the cleanup of the development construction  to its functioning in the long-term,  so we can project the potential long-term costs and benefits.  Ideally, a lot of psychoanalysis that  captures the impacts of the mall from construction  to deconstruction would be carried out.  Regarding the geographic scope, it's  key to include in the study the actual site  plus a certain radius of surrounding  areas and neighboring towns to ensure that cost benefit  analysis gains the full picture of the impacts of the project.  Each cost benefit would require a different scope  depending on the impact and how far it would  reach the surrounding areas.  Consultation with local stakeholders  can be helpful in determining the scope.  Finally, regarding the question of inevitable distribution  of costs and benefits.  We may give higher weight of cost benefit  for particular stakeholders who may experience the impacts  at different rates due to particular situations  or locations such as indigenous peoples  with cultural and physical survival may be at stake.  Those who are negatively affected by it  would carry higher costs, and therefore that  should be factored in.  To wrap up, I just wanted to offer some recommendations  and closing thoughts.  One, issues that we're discussing,  two, scenarios keeping the site as is  or conducting cleanup for a new development such as a mall.  To make an informed decision and given that environmental groups  claim that there have been long-term health  effects experienced by water users in the area,  it would be key to carry out environmental health risk  analysis of the current site, so we  know what we're comparing the action of redevelopment to.  In this case, non-monetary costs and benefits  should be given a score so that the two options of action  and non-action can be compared.  Moreover, I would also encourage us to consider other options  aside from the construction of a mall  as a form of redevelopment.  It would be important to consider  other alternatives that might generate  higher benefit at a lower cost.  Taking these steps and conducting a cost benefit  analysis will give us a more comprehensive picture  of the situation and fill in some important gaps  of information that we currently face  to make an informed decision.  A well done cost benefit analysis  will help us determine which course of action,  as well as how much each party should contribute to make  this plan actually happen.  Thank you. 